0. Herodotus of Halicarnassus published his research in the hope of preserving the memory of what people have done and ensuring that the great and wonderful actions of the Greeks and Barbarians receive the recognition they deserve. He also wanted to document the reasons for their conflicts.
1. According to the Persians, who were well-versed in history, the Phoenicians had migrated from the Erythraean Sea to the Mediterranean and settled in the area now known as Hellas. They began to embark on long voyages, bringing with them the wares of Egypt and Assyria. They landed at many places, including Argos, which was the most powerful of the Hellenic states. They set up their merchandise and traded with the locals for five or six days. Then, a group of women, including the daughter of the king, Io, the daughter of Inachus, came down to the beach. The Phoenicians, with a loud cry, rushed towards them. Most of the women managed to escape, but some were captured and taken away, including Io. The Phoenicians put the women on board their ship and set sail for Egypt. This is the Persian version of the story, which differs from the Phoenician one. This is how the series of outrages began, according to their authors.
2. At a later time, some Greeks (likely Cretans) made a landing at Tyre on the Phoenician coast and took the king's daughter, Europé, in retaliation for a wrong done to them. Then, the Greeks sailed to Aea, a city of Colchis on the river Phasis, and took Medea, the daughter of the king of the land. The king sent a herald to Greece to demand reparation and the return of his daughter, but the Greeks replied that since they had not received reparation for the wrong done to them in the seizure of Io the Argive, they would not give any in this instance.
3. Alexander the son of Priam, aware of the events that had taken place, decided to take a wife from Greece by force. He believed that since the Greeks had not given satisfaction for their wrongdoings, he would not be required to do the same. So, he took Helen and the Greeks decided to send envoys to reclaim her and demand reparation. When they did, they were met with a reminder of the violence that had been inflicted on Medea and were asked how they could now demand satisfaction when they had refused to do so before.
4. Up until this point, both sides had only committed acts of violence; however, the Persians believe the Greeks were in the wrong for leading an army into Asia before any attack had been made on Europe. They say that kidnapping women is the act of a criminal, but to make a fuss about it is foolish. People of sound mind don't care about such women since it's obvious they wouldn't be taken away without their consent. The Asiatics didn't bother themselves when the Greeks took their women, but the Greeks assembled a huge army, invaded Asia, and destroyed Priam's kingdom just for one Lacedaemonian girl. From then on, they saw the Greeks as their enemies. The Persians view Asia, with all its various tribes of barbarians, as their own, but Europe and the Greek race as distinct and separate.
5. The Persians say that their ancient hatred of the Greeks began with the attack on Troy, but the Phoenicians tell a different story about Io. They claim that she willingly left Argos with the captain of the ship when she found out she was pregnant, to avoid the shame of being discovered. Whether this is true or not, I won't debate. I will move on to the person who first hurt the Greeks that I know of, and then I will continue my story, talking about both the great and small cities. Some cities that were once great are now insignificant, and those that are powerful now were weak in the past. I will talk about both, knowing that human happiness never lasts long in one place.
6. Croesus, son of Alyattes and a Lydian by birth, was the ruler of all the nations west of the Halys River. This river, which divides Syria from Paphlagonia, flows from south to north and empties into the Euxine Sea. As far as we know, he was the first of the non-Greeks to have contact with the Greeks, making some of them his tributaries and forming alliances with others. He conquered the Aeolians, Ionians, and Dorians of Asia and made a treaty with the Lacedaemonians, who had previously been free. The Cimmerian attack on Ionia, which happened before Croesus, was not a conquest of the cities but rather a raid for plunder.
7. The Heraclides, descended from Hercules and the slave-girl of Jardanus, had been entrusted with the management of affairs and, according to an oracle, obtained the sovereignty of Lydia, which had belonged to them, for 505 years and 22 generations of men. This period began with Agron, son of Ninus, grandson of Belus, and great-grandson of Alcaeus, and ended with Candaules, son of Myrsus, who the Greeks called Myrsilus. The people of the land, previously known as Meonians, received the name of Lydians from Lydus, son of Atys, and the crown descended in the direct line from father to son throughout the entire period.
8. Candaules was madly in love with his wife and thought she was the most beautiful woman in the world. This obsession had strange consequences. He had a favorite in his bodyguard, Gyges, the son of Dascylus, to whom he entrusted his most important affairs and to whom he would boast about his wife's beauty. One day, Candaules, who was doomed to a bad end, said to his follower, "I can tell you how beautiful my wife is, but you won't believe me. So, since eyes are more trustworthy than ears, let's find a way for you to see her without her clothes." Gyges was appalled and said, "What kind of foolishness is this, master? Do you want me to see my mistress naked? Women lose their modesty when they take off their clothes. Our ancestors knew the difference between right and wrong and it's wise to follow their example. There's an old saying, 'Let each look on his own.' I think your wife is the most beautiful woman in the world, but please don't ask me to do something wrong."
9. Gyges tried to refuse the king's offer, scared of what might happen to him. But the king reassured him, "Don't worry, I'm not trying to test you. Don't be afraid of your mistress either, nothing bad will happen to you. I'll make sure she doesn't even know you were there. I'll put you behind the door of the bedroom when I go to sleep. She'll come in after me and put her clothes on the chair near the door. You'll be able to take a good look at her. When she turns away from the chair to go to bed, make sure she doesn't see you as you leave the room."
10. When bedtime came, Gyges had no choice but to declare his readiness as Candaules led him into the sleeping chamber. As the queen entered and laid her garments on the chair, Gyges couldn't help but stare. When she moved towards the bed, her back turned, Gyges quickly and quietly left the room. But as he was leaving, the queen saw him and, understanding what had happened, she didn't scream or show any sign of embarrassment, instead deciding to take revenge on her husband for his affront. In Lydian culture, and among the barbarians, it was considered a deep disgrace for a man to be seen naked.
11. When no sound or sign of intelligence escaped her, the queen hastened to choose from her retinue those she knew to be most faithful to her and, preparing them for what was to come, summoned Gyges into her presence. He obeyed the summons, unaware that she knew of what had occurred. She said to him, "Take your choice, Gyges, of two courses open to you: slay Candaules and become my lord, or die this moment in his place. You must not again obey your master's behests and see what is not lawful for you." Gyges stood in mute astonishment, then implored the queen not to compel him to such a hard choice. But finding his pleas in vain, he chose life for himself and asked, "If it must be so, and you are forcing me to kill my lord, tell me how you want me to do it." She replied, "Attack him on the spot where I was shown naked to you and make the assault when he is asleep."
12. When night fell, Gyges had no choice but to either kill Candaules or be killed himself. His mistress gave him a dagger and hid him behind the bedroom door. When the king was asleep, Gyges entered the room and struck him dead. This way, Gyges gained Candaules' wife and kingdom. Archilochus the Parian, who lived around the same time, wrote a poem about it in iambic trimeter verse.
13. Gyges was confirmed as king of the Lydians after the Delphic oracle declared him so. The people were enraged at the murder of their king and took up arms, but eventually the partisans of Gyges came to an agreement with them. It was decided that if the oracle declared Gyges king, he would reign, but if not, he would have to give up the throne to the Heraclides. The oracle declared in his favour, so he became king. The Pythoness also added that in the fifth generation from Gyges, vengeance would come for the Heraclides, but neither the Lydians nor their princes paid any attention to this prophecy until it was fulfilled. This is how the Mermnadae deposed the Heraclides and gained the sovereignty.
14. When Gyges was established on the throne, he sent many silver offerings to Delphi, including six goblets weighing thirty talents, which are now in the Corinthian treasury dedicated by him. He was the first barbarian, apart from Midas, son of Gordias, king of Phrygia, to send offerings to Delphi. Midas dedicated his royal throne, which can still be seen in the same place as the goblets. The Delphians call the silver and gold Gyges dedicated after him 'Gygian'. As soon as Gyges was king, he invaded Miletus and Smyrna and took Colophon, but he did not perform any noble exploits during his thirty-eight year reign. His son and successor, Ardys, then took over.
15. Ardys took Priêné and waged war on Miletus. During his reign, the Cimmerians, who had been forced out of their homes by the nomads of Scythia, invaded Asia and seized Sardis, except for the citadel. He reigned for forty-nine years, and was succeeded by his son, Sadyattes, who reigned for twelve years. Upon Sadyattes' death, his son Alyattes ascended the throne.
16. The prince waged war with the Medes under Cyaxares, the grandson of Deioces, drove the Cimmerians out of Asia, conquered Smyrna, the Colophonian colony, and invaded Clazomenae. Unfortunately, he did not fare well in this last battle and suffered a severe defeat. Despite this, he achieved many other noteworthy accomplishments during his reign, which I will now discuss.
17. Inheriting a war with the Milesians from his father, he attacked the city in a unique way. He marched his army into Milesia with the sound of pipes, harps, and flutes, but instead of demolishing the buildings, he left them standing. He cut down and destroyed all the trees and crops, then returned to his own domain. He knew it was useless to siege the city since the Milesians were in control of the sea, so he left the buildings intact to tempt the inhabitants to use them as homesteads, so he could plunder something each time he invaded the country.
18. For eleven years, Alyattes, son of Sadyattes, waged war against the Milesians. He inflicted two devastating blows on them: one in their own country in Limeneium and the other in the Maeander plain. During the first six years of the war, Sadyattes was king of Lydia and made the incursions. The remaining five years of the war were during Alyattes' reign, who inherited the war from his father and devoted himself to it. The Milesians received no help from any of the Ionians, except the Chiosians, who sent troops in return for the Milesians' help in their war against the Erythraeans.
19. In the twelfth year of the war, a mischance occurred when the soldiers set fire to the harvest-fields. A strong wind blew the flames against the temple of Minerva Assesia, burning it to the ground. No one paid much attention to it at the time, but when the army returned to Sardis, Alyattes fell ill. He sent messengers to Delphi to ask the god about his illness, but the Pythoness refused to answer until they rebuilt the temple of Minerva that had been destroyed in Milesia.
20. I heard from the Delphians that Periander, son of Cypselus and a close friend of Thrasybulus, the tyrant of Miletus, sent a messenger to report the oracle to him so that he could prepare for the outcome.
21. Alyattes, upon hearing the oracle's words, sent a herald to Miletus to negotiate a truce so they could rebuild the temple. But Thrasybulus had been informed of the plan and devised a plan of his own. He gathered all the corn in the city, both his own and that of private citizens, and ordered the Milesians to be ready. When he gave the signal, they were to start drinking and partying.
22. Alyattes gave orders with the purpose of having the Sardian herald observe the great store of corn on the ground and the city in festivity, which would inform Alyattes of the situation. The herald did as expected and returned to Sardis with news that was contrary to what Alyattes had expected. This led to a treaty between the two nations, making them close friends and allies. Alyattes built two temples to Minerva at Assesus instead of one and recovered from his malady. These were the main events of the war between Alyattes and Thrasybulus and the Milesians.
23. Periander, son of Cypselus and tyrant of Corinth, informed Thrasybulus of the oracle. It is said that a remarkable event occurred during his reign. Both the Corinthians and Lesbians agree on the story. Arion of Methymna, a renowned harpist and the first to create the dithyrambic measure, name it, and recite it in Corinth, was taken to Taenarum on the back of a dolphin.
24. For many years, Arion had lived at the court of Periander, but he was overcome with a longing to sail to Italy and Sicily. After making a profit in those parts, he wanted to return to Corinth, so he hired a vessel with a crew of Corinthians, believing they were the most trustworthy people. He set sail from Tarentum, but the sailors had a plan to throw him overboard and take his riches. When Arion discovered their scheme, he fell to his knees and begged them to spare his life, offering them his money. They refused, and demanded he either kill himself or jump into the sea. Desperate, Arion asked if he could stand on the quarter-deck in his full costume and play and sing one last song before he killed himself. The sailors were delighted at the prospect of hearing the best harper in the world, so they moved to the middle of the vessel and Arion dressed himself in his costume, took his harp, and sang the Orthian. When he finished, he leapt into the sea. The Corinthians sailed to Corinth, and Arion was carried on the back of a dolphin to Taenarum, where he went ashore and returned to Corinth in his musician's dress to tell everyone what had happened. Periander didn't believe him, so he put Arion in ward to prevent him from leaving Corinth while he waited for the sailors' return. When they arrived, he asked them if they had any news of Arion, and they lied and said he was alive and doing well in Italy. Arion then appeared before them in the same costume he had jumped in, and the sailors were astonished and exposed. To this day, there is an offering of Arion's at the shrine in Taenarum, a small bronze figure of a man seated on a dolphin.
25. Alyattes, who reigned over Lydia for fifty-seven years and brought the war with the Milesians to a close, died. He was the second prince of his house to make offerings at Delphi, and his gifts, sent upon recovering from his sickness, included a great bowl of pure silver and a salver in steel that was "the best worth looking at" among all the offerings at Delphi. Glaucus, the Chian, had crafted it, being the first to invent the art of inlaying steel.
26. When Alyattes died, his 35-year-old son Croesus took the throne. He began his reign by attacking Ephesus, the first of the Greek cities. The Ephesians, in an attempt to save their city, offered it to Diana by stretching a rope from the town wall to the temple of the goddess, which was seven furlongs away from the besieged city. After Ephesus, Croesus went on to attack every Ionian and Aeolian state, using a substantial ground of complaint when he could and a poor excuse when he couldn't.
27. Croesus had conquered all the Greek cities in Asia and forced them to become his tributaries. He was about to build ships and attack the islanders when Bias of Priêné (or Pittacus the Mytilenean) arrived at Sardis and asked if there was any news from Greece. Bias replied, "Yes, sire, the islanders are gathering ten thousand horse, designing an expedition against thee and against thy capital." Croesus, thinking he was serious, exclaimed, "Ah, might the gods put such a thought into their minds as to attack the sons of the Lydians with cavalry!" Bias then said, "It seems, oh! king, that thou desirest earnestly to catch the islanders on horseback upon the mainland. But what thinkest thou the islanders desire better, now that they hear thou art about to build ships and sail against them, than to catch the Lydians at sea, and there revenge on them the wrongs of their brothers upon the mainland, whom thou holdest in slavery?" Croesus was impressed with the suggestion and, realizing there was truth to it, gave up his ship-building and concluded a league of amity with the Ionians of the isles.
28. Over the course of many years, Croesus managed to bring almost all the nations to the west of the Halys under his rule, with the exception of the Lycians and Cilicians who remained free. This included the Lydians, Phrygians, Mysians, Mariandynians, Chalybians, Paphlagonians, Thynian and Bithynian Thracians, Carians, Ionians, Dorians, Aeolians and Pamphylians.
29. When the Lydian empire had grown to include all these conquests, and Sardis was at its most prosperous, all the sages of Greece living at the time came to visit, including Solon, the Athenian. He was travelling, having left Athens for ten years, claiming he wanted to see the world, but really to avoid being forced to repeal any of the laws he had made for the Athenians at their request. Without his approval, the Athenians couldn't repeal them, as they had sworn a heavy curse to be governed by the laws Solon imposed on them for ten years.
30. Solon set out on his travels to see the world and ended up at the court of Amasis in Egypt and as a guest of Croesus at Sardis. Croesus showed him his treasuries and asked him who he thought was the most happy of all the people he had seen. Solon replied without flattery that it was Tellus of Athens. Croesus was astonished and asked why. Solon explained that Tellus' country was flourishing during his lifetime, he had beautiful and good sons and grandchildren, and he died gloriously in battle while helping his countrymen. The Athenians gave him a public funeral and paid him the highest honours.
31. Solon told Croesus the story of Tellus to illustrate his many blessings. When Croesus asked who was the second happiest person, Solon replied, "Cleobis and Bito, two Argive brothers. They had enough money to meet their needs and were strong enough to win prizes at the Games. There was a festival in honour of Juno at Argos and their mother needed to be taken there in a carriage. The oxen didn't arrive in time, so the brothers yoked themselves to the carriage and pulled it 45 furlongs to the temple. Everyone was amazed at their strength and the mother was overjoyed. She prayed to the goddess to give her sons the greatest blessing a mortal can receive. After they sacrificed and ate, they fell asleep in the temple and never woke up. The Argives honoured them by making statues of them and placing them in the shrine at Delphi."
32. Solon had assigned the youths the second place, and Croesus angrily interjected, "What, stranger of Athens, is my happiness so utterly disregarded by you that you don't even put me on the same level as private men?" Solon replied, "Oh, Croesus, you asked me about the condition of man, and I know that the power above us is jealous and loves to disrupt our lives. I believe that seventy years is the limit of a human life. In those seventy years, without counting intercalary months, there are twenty-five thousand two hundred days. If you add an intercalary month to every other year, so that the seasons come at the right time, there will be an additional one thousand and fifty days. That means that in seventy years there are twenty-six thousand two hundred and fifty days, and each one of them brings something different. So, man is completely unpredictable. You, Croesus, are incredibly wealthy and the ruler of many nations, but I can't answer your question until I know that you have ended your life happily. Wealthy people have more ability to satisfy their desires and to withstand sudden misfortune, but those with less money have many advantages too. They are healthy, free from misfortune, blessed with children, and attractive. If, in addition to all this, they end their life well, then they are the person you are looking for, the one who can be called happy. Until then, they are only fortunate. It's impossible for anyone to have all these advantages, just like no country has everything it needs. The one who has the most advantages and keeps them until the end of their life, and then dies peacefully, is the only one who can be called truly happy. But, we must always consider the end, because God often gives people a glimpse of happiness before plunging them into ruin."
33. Solon addressed Croesus, but his speech earned him neither money nor respect. The king watched him leave with little interest, thinking that anyone who didn't value immediate gain and instead advised people to wait and see the outcome must be a complete idiot.
34. After Solon had gone, God sent a dreadful vengeance upon Croesus to punish him for thinking he was the happiest of men. That night, Croesus had a dream that foretold the evil that was about to befall him in the form of his son. He had two sons, one of whom was deaf and dumb, and the other, Atys, was distinguished in every pursuit. In the dream, Croesus saw Atys die from a blow of an iron weapon. When he woke, he was greatly alarmed and immediately made Atys take a wife. He also forbade Atys from accompanying the Lydian forces in the field and removed all spears, javelins, and weapons from the male apartments, piling them in the chambers of the women, fearing that one of the weapons hanging against the wall might fall and strike him.
35. While Croesus was making arrangements for his wedding, a man with a stain of blood on him arrived at Sardis. He was a Phrygian and from the family of the king. He asked to be purified according to the customs of the country, which were similar to the Greek. Croesus granted his request and went through the customary rites. He then asked the man his birth and country, and who he had killed. The man replied, "I am Adrastus, son of Gordias, son of Midas. I unintentionally killed my own brother, so my father drove me from the land and I lost everything. I came here to you for refuge." Croesus said, "You are from a family friendly to mine and you have come to friends. As long as you stay in my dominion, you will want for nothing. Bear your misfortune as best you can." Adrastus then lived in the palace of the king.
36. At the same time, a huge boar monster had appeared in Mysian Olympus and was destroying the Mysians' crops. The Mysians had tried to hunt it down, but to no avail. So they sent ambassadors to Croesus, asking him to send his son and some chosen youths and hounds to help them get rid of the animal. Croesus, however, remembered his dream and refused, offering instead a picked band of Lydians, his huntsmen, and his hounds. He promised to send them with instructions to do their best to rid the Mysians of the boar.
37. The Mysians were content with the reply, but the king's son, hearing their prayer, suddenly entered and, upon his father's refusal to let him go with them, said, "Father, it used to be considered the most noble and appropriate thing for me to attend wars and hunting parties and gain glory there. But now you keep me away from both, even though you've never seen me be cowardly or lack courage. What will people think when they see me walking to the forum or returning from it? What will my young bride think of me? What kind of man will she think her husband is? Either let me go hunt this boar or give me a reason why it's best for me to do as you wish."
38. Croesus answered, "It's not because I'm displeased with you that I'm holding you back. I had a dream that warned me you were doomed to die young, pierced by an iron weapon. That's why I rushed your wedding, and now it's why I'm not sending you on this mission. I want to protect you if I can, since you're my only son. The other one, who can't hear, I don't count."
39. "Father," the youth said, "I don't blame you for being worried after such a terrible dream, but if you're misunderstanding it, I should be able to show you where you're wrong. You said the dream foretold that I would die from an iron weapon, but what does a boar have to strike with? What iron weapon does it wield? That's what you're afraid of for me. If the dream had said I would die from a tusk, then you would have been right to keep me away, but it said a weapon. We're not fighting people here, just a wild animal. Please, let me go with them."
40. Croesus said to his son, "You've convinced me. I'm changing my mind and giving you my consent to go."
41. The king called for Adrastus, the Phrygian, and said, "Adrastus, I purified you when you were struck with the rod of affliction, and I've taken you to live with me in my palace. I've taken care of all the expenses. Now, I want you to repay me by accompanying my son on this hunting party and protecting him if we're attacked by robbers. Even if that doesn't happen, you should go and make yourself famous with noble deeds. That's the legacy of your family, and you're strong and stalwart."
42. Adrastus replied, "If it weren't for your request, King, I would have stayed away from this hunt. I don't think it's right for someone in my situation to be around people who are happier than me, and I don't have the heart for it. I had many reasons to stay behind, but since you asked and I owe it to you to repay your kindness, I'll do as you wish. You can be sure that I'll return your son safe and sound, as long as I'm careful as his guardian."
43. Assured, Croesus sent a band of picked youths and their dogs of chase to Olympus. When they found the animal, they surrounded it and threw their weapons. Adrastus, the man purified of blood, also threw his spear, but instead of hitting the boar, it struck Atys, Croesus' son. The vision's warning had come true. One of the hunters ran back to Sardis to tell the king what had happened, and he arrived to inform Croesus of the combat and his son's fate.
44. The news that his child was dead was a heavy blow to the father, but it was even more devastating to think that the very man he had once purified had done the deed. In his grief, he cried out to Jupiter Catharsius to bear witness to his suffering at the hands of the stranger. He then invoked the same god as Jupiter Ephistius and Hetaereus, using the first name because he had unknowingly sheltered the man who had killed his son, and the second because the stranger, who had been sent as his child's guardian, had become his most cruel enemy.
45. The Lydians arrived with the body of the youth, followed by the homicide who begged Croesus to sacrifice him on the body of his son. He said his former misfortune was enough, and now that he had added a second and brought ruin on the man who purified him, he couldn't bear to live. Croesus was moved with pity and said, "Enough, my friend. I have all the revenge I require since you give sentence of death against yourself. It's not you who injured me, except as you unwittingly dealt the blow. Some god is the author of my misfortune, and I was forewarned of it a long time ago." Croesus buried the body of his son with the honours it deserved, and Adrastus, son of Gordias, son of Midas, the destroyer of his brother in the past and now of his purifier, killed himself on the tomb, considering himself the most unfortunate wretch he had ever known. Croesus, bereft of his son, mourned for two full years.
46. At the end of this time, Croesus was interrupted by news from abroad: Cyrus, the son of Cambyses, had destroyed the empire of Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, and the Persians were becoming more powerful every day. Croesus wondered if he could stop their growing power before it got out of hand, so he decided to test the oracles in Greece and Libya. He sent messengers to Delphi, Abae in Phocis, Dodona, the oracle of Amphiaraus, the oracle of Trophonius, and Branchidae in Milesia. He also sent another embassy to Libya to consult the oracle of Ammon. These messengers were sent to test the knowledge of the oracles, so that if they gave true answers, Croesus could send a second time and ask if he should attack the Persians.
47. The messengers sent to test the oracles were instructed to keep track of the days since leaving Sardis and, on the hundredth day, to consult the oracles and ask what Croesus, son of Alyattes and king of Lydia, was doing at that moment. They were to write down the answers and bring them back to him. The only answer that remains on record is from the oracle at Delphi. As soon as the Lydians entered the sanctuary, the Pythoness answered them in hexameter verse: "I can count the grains of sand and measure the ocean; I can hear the silent and understand the speechless. Look! I smell a shell-covered tortoise boiling in a brass cauldron with a lamb's flesh. The pot is brass and the lid is brass too."
48. Croesus sent messengers to the Oracle of Delphi to ask for advice. When they returned with the answers, he read them all, but only the Delphic oracle's answer made sense to him. He bowed in reverence and accepted it as true, declaring that the Delphic was the only truly prophetic shrine. To prove it, he had come up with an impossible task: he took a tortoise and a lamb, cut them into pieces with his own hands, and boiled them together in a brass cauldron with a brass lid.
49. Croesus received an answer from Delphi, but there is no record of what the Lydians who went to the shrine of Amphiarans and performed the customary rites were told by the oracle. All that is known is that Croesus believed the oracle spoke the truth.
50. After Croesus had decided to make a grand sacrifice to the Delphic god, he offered up three thousand sacrificial beasts and built a huge pile of silver and gold-coated couches, golden goblets, and purple robes and vests, which he burned in the hope of gaining the god's favor. He also commanded all the people of the land to make a sacrifice according to their means. When the sacrifice was finished, Croesus melted down a large amount of gold and made 117 ingots, four of which were refined gold weighing two and a half talents, and the rest were pale gold weighing two talents. He also had a lion statue made out of refined gold, weighing ten talents. When the temple of Delphi burned down, the lion fell from the ingots it was placed on and now stands in the Corinthian treasury, but it only weighs six and a half talents, having lost three and a half talents in the fire.
51. Upon completing his works, Croesus sent them to Delphi, along with two enormous bowls, one of gold and one of silver, which used to stand on either side of the entrance to the temple. The golden bowl is now in the Clazomenian treasury and weighs eight talents and forty-two minae, while the silver bowl is in the corner of the ante-chapel and holds six hundred amphorae. The Delphians say it was made by Theodore the Samian, and it certainly looks like the work of a master craftsman. Croesus also sent four silver casks to the Corinthian treasury, and two lustral vases, one of gold and one of silver. The gold one has the name of the Lacedaemonians inscribed on it, but it was actually a gift from Croesus. The Delphian who inscribed it did so to please the Lacedaemonians, but the boy who pours the water is the only thing they gave. In addition to these, Croesus sent many other offerings of lesser value, including a number of round silver basins, a three-cubit-high gold statue of his baking-woman, and the necklace and girdles of his wife.
52. Croesus sent offerings to Delphi, including a golden shield and a golden spear with both head and shaft. These offerings were still in existence in my time at Thebes, stored in the temple of Ismenian Apollo.
53. The messengers sent by Croesus of Lydia and other countries to the oracles, bearing gifts in recognition of their discoveries, asked the oracles if Croesus should go to war with the Persians and if so, if he should seek an ally. Both oracles agreed in their reply: if Croesus attacked the Persians, he would destroy a mighty empire, and they advised him to look and see who were the most powerful of the Greeks and to make an alliance with them.
54. Upon receiving these prophetic responses, Croesus was ecstatic and, now certain that he would conquer the Persian Empire, he sent another offering to Pytho and gave two gold staters to each of the Delphians, whose number he had determined. In return, the Delphians granted Croesus and the Lydians the privilege of priority when consulting the oracle, freedom from all fees, the most prestigious seat at festivals, and the perpetual right to become citizens of their town whenever they wished.
55. After testing the truthfulness of the oracle, Croesus consulted it again to ask if his kingdom would last a long time. The Pythoness replied, "Wait until a mule is king of Media, then, delicate Lydian, flee to the pebbles of Hermus. Hurry away, don't be ashamed to act like a coward."
56. He was pleased with the answer he received most of all, as it seemed impossible for a mule to become king of the Medes, so he was sure the sovereignty would stay with him and his descendants. He then thought about the alliance he was advised to make and tried to find out which was the most powerful of the Greek states. He discovered two that stood out from the rest: the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, the former of Doric and the latter of Ionic descent. These two nations had been prominent in Greece since ancient times, one being Pelasgic and the other Hellenic, one never leaving its original home and the other migrating a lot. During the reign of Deucalion, the Hellenes lived in Phthiôtis, but under Dorus, the son of Hellen, they moved to Histiaeotis at the base of Ossa and Olympus, then they were forced to leave by the Cadmeians and settled in the Pindus chain as Macedni. After that, they moved to Dryopis and entered the Peloponnese, becoming known as Dorians.
57. I cannot say with any certainty what language the Pelasgi spoke. However, if we form a conjecture from the language spoken by the Pelasgi today, such as those living at Creston above the Tyrrhenians, who were formerly in Thessaliotis and neighbors of the Dorians, or those who founded Placia and Scylace upon the Hellespont, who had previously lived with the Athenians, or any other city that has dropped the name but is in fact Pelasgian, we must conclude that the Pelasgi spoke a barbaric language. If this is true and the entire Pelasgic race spoke the same language, the Athenians, who were Pelasgi, must have changed their language when they joined the Hellenic body. This is evident because the people of Creston and the Placianians speak a language unlike any of their neighbors, yet the same language, which shows that they both retain the idiom they brought with them to their current settlements.
58. Since its inception, the Hellenic race has never changed its language. This appears to be true. It was a branch of the Pelasgic, which split off from the main group and was initially small in size and weak; however, it gradually grew and expanded into many nations, largely due to the influx of numerous barbarian tribes who joined willingly. On the other hand, the Pelasgi, I believe, were a barbarian race that never grew in numbers.
59. When Croesus looked into the state of the two nations, he found that the Athenians were in a state of great distress and turmoil under the rule of Pisistratus, the son of Hippocrates. It is said that Hippocrates once went to Olympia to watch the Games and a strange miracle occurred. As he was sacrificing, the cauldrons filled with water and the flesh of the victims began to boil without fire, and the water spilled over the pots. Chilon the Lacedaemonian, who was there and saw the prodigy, advised Hippocrates not to marry if he was single, to send his wife back to her family if he was married, and to disown his son if he had one. Hippocrates was not pleased with this advice and some time later he became the father of Pisistratus. Pisistratus, when there was a conflict between the Sea-coast party led by Megacles the son of Alcmaeon and the Plain party led by Lycurgus of the Aristolaids, decided to make himself tyrant and formed a third party. He gathered a group of followers and presented himself as the protector of the Highlanders. He then drove his chariot into the market-place, claiming he had just escaped an attack from his enemies, and asked the people to give him a guard to protect him. He reminded them of his success when he led the attack on the Megarians and captured Nisaea, and the Athenians, believing his story, gave him a group of citizens to serve as a guard, who carried clubs instead of spears and followed him wherever he went. With this strength, Pisistratus revolted and seized the citadel, becoming the ruler of Athens. He kept the existing offices and laws and managed the state in a wise and beneficial way.
60. After a while, the supporters of Megacles and Lycurgus put aside their differences and joined forces to oust Pisistratus. But before his power had a chance to take hold, he was gone. As soon as he left, the factions that had driven him out started quarreling again. Exhausted by the conflict, Megacles sent a messenger to Pisistratus with an offer to reinstate him on the throne if he married his daughter. Pisistratus accepted and an agreement was made. To carry out the plan, they came up with a silly scheme, especially for the Greeks, who were known for their intelligence and freedom from foolishness, and the Athenians, who were said to be the cleverest of all Greeks. In the Paeanian district, there was a woman named Phya who was almost four cubits tall and attractive. They dressed her in full armor, taught her how to act, and put her in a chariot. Heralds were sent ahead to proclaim, "Athenians, welcome back Pisistratus with open arms. Minerva, who honors him above all men, is bringing him back to her citadel." The news spread quickly and the people of the city, believing the woman was Minerva, bowed down before her and welcomed Pisistratus back.
61. Pisistratus married the daughter of Megacles, as agreed, but since he already had grown sons and the Alcmaeonidae were believed to be cursed, he decided there would be no children from the marriage. His wife kept this to herself at first, but eventually her mother found out or she told her, and it reached Megacles' ears. Furious at the insult, he reconciled with the opposing faction, so Pisistratus left the country and went to Eretria. He held a council with his children to decide what to do, and Hippias' opinion prevailed: they would try to regain the sovereignty. They got money from various countries, especially Thebes, who gave them more than anyone else. Eventually, they were ready to return with a band of Argos mercenaries and Lygdamis, a Naxian who volunteered his services and provided both men and money.
62. In the eleventh year of their exile, the family of Pisistratus set sail from Eretria and made their way to the coast of Attica near Marathon, where they were joined by their supporters from the capital and those from the countryside who preferred tyranny to freedom. When Pisistratus arrived at Marathon, no one paid any attention to him, but when it became known that he was marching on the city, the Athenians prepared to resist and the whole army was called up to meet the returning exiles. When the two sides met near the temple of Pallenian Minerva, Pisistratus' army set up camp opposite them. Suddenly, an Acarnanian soothsayer named Amphilytus, moved by a divine impulse, came into Pisistratus' presence and said in a hexameter measure, "Now the cast has been made, the net is out-spread in the water, through the moonshiny night the tunnies will enter the meshes."
63. Pisistratus, understanding the prophecy uttered under divine inspiration, declared he accepted the oracle and led his army. The Athenians had just finished their midday meal and were either playing dice or sleeping when Pisistratus and his troops attacked, causing them to flee. Pisistratus had a wise plan to prevent them from uniting again: he put his sons on horseback and sent them ahead to catch up with the fugitives, encouraging them to go home. The Athenians followed the advice and Pisistratus became master of Athens for the third time.
64. Pisistratus sought to strengthen his power by hiring a large number of mercenaries and keeping his treasury full, partly from Athenian sources and partly from the countries around the Strymon River. He also took hostages from many of the Athenians who had stayed in Athens instead of fleeing, and sent them to Naxos, which he had conquered and put under Lygdamis' control. He also followed an oracle's instructions and purified Delos by digging up and moving all the corpses buried in sight of the temple to another part of the island. This was how Pisistratus' tyranny was established in Athens, with many Athenians killed in battle and many more fleeing the country with Alcmaeon's son.
65. When Croesus inquired about the Athenians, he learned that the Lacedaemonians had recently won a war against the people of Tegea after a period of great depression. Before that, they had been the worst-governed people in Greece, both in terms of internal management and foreign relations. Lycurgus, a man of distinction among the Spartans, visited the oracle at Delphi and the Pythoness exclaimed, "Oh! thou great Lycurgus, that com'st to my beautiful dwelling, Dear to love, and to all who sit in the halls of Olympus, Whether to hail thee a god I know not, or only a mortal, But my hope is strong that a god thou wilt prove, Lycurgus." Some say the Pythoness gave him the entire system of laws still observed by the Spartans, but the Lacedaemonians claim that when Lycurgus was guardian of his nephew, Labotas, king of Sparta, and regent in his room, he introduced them from Crete. He changed all the existing customs and substituted new ones, which he made sure everyone followed. He also arranged for war, establishing the Enomotiae, Triacades, and Syssitia, as well as the senate and the ephoralty. This is how the Lacedaemonians became a well-governed people.
66. Upon Lycurgus' death, they built him a temple and worshipped him with utmost reverence. Their soil was fertile and their population was large, so they quickly rose to power and became a prosperous people. No longer content to stay still, they viewed the Arcadians as inferior and consulted the oracle about conquering Arcadia. The Pythoness replied, "Do you crave Arcady? Your craving is bold. I cannot fulfill it. Many men in Arcady live on acorns and will never allow you. I am not stingy. I will give you to dance in Tegea, with noisy footfall, and with the measuring line, measure out the glorious plain." When the Lacedaemonians received this answer, they marched against the Tegeans, carrying fetters, so sure of success due to the oracle's (which was of base metal) prediction. However, the battle went against them and many were taken captive. These prisoners, wearing the fetters they had brought, measured the Tegean plain as they worked. The fetters were still preserved in the temple of Minerva Alea at Tegea, hanging around the walls.
67. The Lacedaemonians had been defeated in every battle against the Tegeans until the time of Croesus, when kings Anaxandrides and Aristo brought fortune to their side. To find out what god they must propitiate to win the war, they sent to Delphi and asked the oracle. The Pythoness replied that before they could prevail, they must move the bones of Orestes, the son of Agamemnon, to Sparta. Not knowing where the body of the hero had been laid, they sent a second time and received the answer: "Level and smooth is the plain where Arcadian Tegea standeth; there two winds are ever, by strong necessity, blowing; counter-stroke answers stroke, and evil lies upon evil. There all-teeming Earth doth harbour the son of Atrides; bring thou him to thy city, and then be Tegea's master." Despite their diligent search, the Lacedaemonians were still unable to discover the burial-place until a man named Lichas, one of the Spartans called Agathoergi, found it. The Agathoergi are citizens who have just served their time among the knights and the five eldest of the knights go out every year, bound to go wherever the State sends them and actively employ themselves in its service.
68. Lichas was part of a group that, through a combination of luck and wisdom, discovered the burial place. He went to Tegea and, while in a smith's workshop, he saw the smith forging iron and was amazed. The smith noticed him and said, "You'd be even more surprised if you saw what I did. I was digging a well in this room and found a coffin seven cubits long. I couldn't believe people were that tall in the old days, so I opened it and the body inside was the same length. I measured it and filled the hole back up." Lichas thought this might be the body the oracle had spoken of, since the smithy had two bellows (the two winds), a hammer and anvil (the stroke and counterstroke), and iron (the evil lying upon evil). He quickly returned to Sparta and told them what he had heard. They accused him and he fled to Tegea, where he convinced the smith to let him rent the room. He opened the grave, collected the bones, and returned to Sparta. From then on, the Spartans had the upper hand in battles with the Tegeans and eventually became masters of most of the Peloponnese.
69. Croesus sent messengers to Sparta with gifts, instructing them to ask the Spartans to form an alliance. When they arrived, they said, "Croesus, king of the Lydians and other nations, has sent us to ask you to become his friend and ally in all true faith and honesty." The Spartans, already aware of the oracle's response, were delighted and quickly took the oaths of friendship and alliance, as they had already been obligated to Croesus. He had heard of their plan to buy gold for a statue of Apollo at Thornax in Laconia and gave them the gold as a gift.
70. The Lacedaemonians were eager to form an alliance with Croesus because he had chosen them as his friends over all other Greeks. To show their appreciation, they made a bronze vase with figures of animals around the rim, large enough to hold three hundred amphorae, and sent it to Croesus as a gift. Unfortunately, the vase never made it to Sardis. The Lacedaemonians claimed that when it reached Samos, the Samians seized it with their warships. The Samians, however, said that the Lacedaemonians had arrived too late and, upon learning that Sardis had fallen and Croesus was a prisoner, sold the vase in their island. The purchasers, supposedly private persons, then made an offering of it at the shrine of Juno. The Lacedaemonians, upon returning to Sparta, likely said they had been robbed of it by the Samians. Thus, the vase met its fate.
71. As Croesus prepared to attack the Persians, a wise Lydian named Sandanis stepped forward and warned him that the Persians had nothing of value to gain from them, and if they were to conquer Lydia, they would never be able to let go of the luxuries they would gain. Sandanis thanked the gods that the Persians had not yet invaded Lydia, but Croesus was not convinced and continued with his plans.
72. The Cappadocians were known to the Greeks as Syrians. Before the rise of the Persian Empire, they had been under the rule of the Medes, but at the time of Cyrus, they were part of his empire. The Halys River was the boundary between the Median and Lydian empires. This river, which began in the mountains of Armenia, ran through Cilicia, with the Matieni on the right and Phrygia on the left. After passing these, it continued north, separating the Cappadocian Syrians from the Paphlagonians on the left bank, forming the boundary of most of Lower Asia, from the sea near Cyprus to the Euxine. This was the neck of the peninsula, a five-day journey for a fast walker.
73. Croesus had two reasons for attacking Cappadocia: he wanted to add the land to his own dominions, but the main reason was to avenge Astyages, who had been dethroned by Cyrus, son of Cambyses. Astyages was Croesus' brother-in-law, and their marriage had come about in a strange way. A group of Scythian nomads had fled their homeland and taken refuge in Media. Cyaxares, son of Phraortes and grandson of Deioces, was the king of the country at the time. He welcomed them and gave them a number of boys to teach their language and how to use a bow. The Scythians went hunting every day and usually brought back game, but one day they returned empty-handed. Cyaxares, who had a hot temper, insulted them. In response, the Scythians decided to take one of the boys, cut him up, and serve him to Cyaxares as game. After they had done this, they fled to Alyattes, the son of Sadyattes, in Sardis.
74. After Alyattes refused to give up his suppliants to Cyaxares, war broke out between the Lydians and the Medes and lasted for five years with varying success. Both sides won many battles, including one night engagement. Neither side had the upper hand, so another battle was fought in the sixth year. Suddenly, day turned to night, as Thales the Milesian had predicted. The Medes and Lydians stopped fighting and wanted to make peace. Syennesis of Cilicia and Labynetus of Babylon mediated between the two sides, and they suggested that Alyattes give his daughter Aryenis to Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, as a sure bond of strong necessity. To swear an oath, the people made a slight flesh wound in their arms and sucked each other's blood.
75. Cyrus had captured Astyages, his mother's father, and kept him prisoner, which I will explain in another part of my history. This capture caused a quarrel between Cyrus and Croesus, so Croesus sent his servants to ask the oracle if he should attack the Persians. When the oracle gave an ambiguous answer, Croesus thought it was in his favor and marched his army into the Persian territory. When he reached the river Halys, he crossed it with his army, either by the bridges that exist there today or, as the Greeks believe, with the help of Thales the Milesian. The story goes that Croesus was unsure how to get his army across since the bridges weren't built yet, and Thales, who happened to be in the camp, diverted the river so it flowed on both sides of the army instead of just the left. He did this by digging a deep channel beginning some distance above the camp and bringing it around in a semicircle so it passed behind the camp, diverting the river from its natural course into the new channel. This way, the river was split into two streams that were easily fordable. Some say the water was completely drained from the river's natural bed, but I don't think that's possible since they wouldn't have been able to cross it on their return.
76. After crossing the Halys with his troops, Croesus invaded Cappadocia's Pteria district, which neighbored Sinope on the Euxine Sea and was the strongest region in the area. He set up camp and started to devastate the Syrians' fields. He captured the Pterians' main city, enslaved its people, and seized the nearby villages, bringing destruction to the innocent Syrians. Meanwhile, Cyrus had assembled an army and was marching towards Croesus, gathering more forces from the nations he passed. Before he left, he sent messengers to the Ionians, asking them to revolt against the Lydian king, but they refused. Despite this, Cyrus continued on and camped opposite Croesus in Pteria, where the two sides clashed. The battle was fierce and many were killed on both sides, but when night fell, neither had emerged victorious. Both armies had fought bravely.
77. Croesus blamed his lack of success on the size of his army, which was much smaller than the enemy's. When Cyrus didn't attack the next day, Croesus returned to Sardis to gather his allies and fight again in the spring. He sent messengers to Egypt to ask for help, as he had an alliance with Amasis, and he also sent word to Babylon and Sparta to come to his aid. He planned to march against the Persians once winter was over and spring had arrived. Croesus sent heralds to his allies, asking them to join him in Sardis in five months' time. He then dismissed the mercenary army that had fought with him against the Persians and returned with him to his capital, never expecting Cyrus to march on Sardis after a battle that had been so evenly matched.
78. While Croesus was still pondering, he noticed that the outskirts of Sardis were swarming with snakes, which caused the horses grazing in the pastures to flock to the suburbs to eat them. Croesus, recognizing this as a sign, immediately sent messengers to the soothsayers of Telmessus to ask for an explanation. When his messengers reached the city, they were told that an army of foreign invaders would soon enter Croesus' country and conquer the native inhabitants, since the snake is a child of the earth and the horse a warrior and a foreigner. Unfortunately, Croesus was already a prisoner by the time the Telmessians gave their answer, and they had no knowledge of what was happening in Sardis or of the king's fate.
79. Cyrus quickly realized that he had to move fast when Croesus suddenly left his camp after the battle at Pteria. He marched forward with such speed that he was the first to announce his arrival to the Lydian king. The king, in a difficult situation, still led his people to battle. The Lydians were the bravest and most warlike people in all of Asia at the time. They fought on horseback, carrying long lances and were skilled in horsemanship.
80. The two armies met on the vast, flat plain of Sardis, watered by the Hyllus and other streams, including the Hermus, which rose in the sacred mountain of the Dindymenian Mother and flowed into the sea near Phocaea. Fearing the strength of the Lydian cavalry, Cyrus, with the suggestion of Harpagus, one of the Medes, collected all the camels that had come with his army to carry provisions and baggage, removed their loads, and mounted riders on them as horsemen. He commanded them to advance in front of his other troops against the Lydian horse, followed by the foot soldiers and lastly the cavalry. He ordered his troops to kill all other Lydians they encountered without mercy, but to spare Croesus and not kill him, even if he resisted. Cyrus used the camels to counter the enemy's horse, as horses have a natural fear of camels and cannot stand their sight or smell. When the armies clashed, the Lydian war-horses, upon seeing and smelling the camels, fled, leaving Croesus's hopes in vain. The Lydians, however, fought bravely, leaping off their horses and engaging the Persians on foot. After a long and bloody battle, the Lydians were driven back within their walls and the Persians laid siege to Sardis.
81. The siege began and Croesus, believing the town would hold out for a while, sent new messengers to his allies from the besieged city. His previous messengers had been instructed to tell them to meet at Sardis in the fifth month, but now he asked them to come to his aid as quickly as possible, including Lacedaemon.
82. In Greece, the Spartans and Argives were in a quarrel over Thyrea, a place within the limits of Argolis. The whole country westward, including Cythera and other islands, had once belonged to the Argives. To settle the dispute, it was agreed that three hundred Spartans and three hundred Argives would fight for the place, and the other troops would return home. The battle was so equal that at the end of the day, only three men remained alive: two Argives and one Spartan, Othryadas. The two Argives claimed victory and ran to Argos, while Othryadas stayed and stripped the bodies of the Argives who had fallen. The next day, the two armies returned and argued over the result, but eventually the Lacedaemonians won. The Argives cut their hair short and made a law never to let it grow again, and never to allow their women to wear gold until they recovered Thyrea. The Lacedaemonians made a law to wear their hair long, which was the opposite of what they had done before. Othryadas, ashamed of returning to Sparta after all his comrades had fallen, killed himself in Thyrea.
83. When the herald from Sardis arrived to ask the Spartans to help the besieged king, they immediately began to prepare for assistance. Just as the ships were ready to set sail, a second message informed them that the place had already fallen and Croesus was a prisoner. Saddened by his misfortune, the Spartans stopped their efforts.
84. On the fourteenth day of the siege, Cyrus ordered some horsemen to ride around his lines and announce that he would reward the first person to climb the wall. He then made an assault, but it was unsuccessful. His troops retreated, but Hyroeades, a Mardian, decided to try and take the citadel at a place where no guards were ever set. The rock was so steep and the citadel seemed so impenetrable that no one thought it could be taken. This was the only part of the fortress that their old king Meles didn't take the lion around, which the Telmessians had said would make it impregnable. He thought the sheer precipice was secure enough, so he didn't bother to take the lion around it. This was the side of the city that faced Mount Tmolus. The day before, Hyroeades had seen a Lydian soldier climb down the rock to retrieve a helmet that had rolled down, and he used this as inspiration. He climbed the rock himself and other Persians followed, until a large number had made it to the top. This is how Sardis was taken and it was completely looted.
85. When Croesus' town was taken, a Persian was about to kill him, not knowing who he was. Croesus, overwhelmed by his affliction, didn't care to avoid the blow, not minding whether he lived or died. His son, who had been deaf and dumb his whole life, saw the Persian coming and, in a desperate attempt to save his father, spoke for the first time, saying, "Don't kill Croesus!" From then on, he had the power of speech for the rest of his life.
86. Cyrus had Croesus, who had reigned for fourteen years, and been besieged in his capital for fourteen days, brought before him and placed on a pile with twice seven of the sons of the Lydians. He was unsure why he was doing this, but he was determined to see if any heavenly powers would appear to save Croesus from being burnt alive. As Croesus was about to be set alight, he thought of the words of Solon, "No one while he lives is happy," and he groaned out Solon's name three times. Cyrus, hearing this, asked the interpreters who Croesus was calling for. After being pressed for an answer, Croesus explained that Solon, an Athenian, had come and seen all his splendour and made light of it, and that whatever he had said had come true. As the fire was lit, Cyrus realized that he was burning a fellow man who had once been as blessed by fortune as himself, and he was afraid of retribution. He ordered them to quench the fire, but it was too late.
87. Croesus, seeing that all efforts to put out the fire were in vain, called out to the god Apollo with tears in his eyes, begging for help. Suddenly, dark clouds gathered and a violent rainstorm extinguished the flames. Cyrus, realizing that Croesus was favored by heaven, asked him who had persuaded him to lead an army into his country and become his foe. Croesus replied, "The blame rests with the god of the Greeks, who encouraged me to begin the war. No one prefers war to peace, where fathers bury their sons instead of the other way around. But the gods willed it so."
88. Croesus sat near Cyrus, who paid him much respect, and the courtiers looked upon him with a sort of wonder. Croesus was deep in thought and said nothing. After a while, he asked Cyrus, "Can I tell you what I'm thinking, or is it better to stay silent?" Cyrus encouraged him to speak his mind. Croesus then asked, "What are those men doing over there?" Cyrus replied, "They're plundering your city and taking your riches." Croesus corrected him, "Not my city or my riches. They're yours now. They're plundering your wealth."
89. Cyrus, taken aback by Croesus' words, asked him what he thought would be best to do about the plundering. Croesus replied, "Now that the gods have made me your slave, Cyrus, it's my duty to show you anything that would be to your advantage. Your people, the Persians, are a proud but poor people. If you let them pillage and get rich, you can expect them to rebel against you. So, if you like my advice, have some of your bodyguards stationed at each of the city gates and let them take the booty from the soldiers as they leave the town. Tell them it's because the tenths are due to Jupiter. That way, you'll avoid the hatred they'd feel if you took the plunder away from them by force. They'll understand that it's fair and will do it willingly."
90. Cyrus was delighted with Croesus' advice and praised him highly. He ordered his bodyguard to do as Croesus had suggested and then asked Croesus what he wanted as a gift. Croesus replied that he wanted to send his fetters to the Greek god he had once honoured above all others and ask him if it was his custom to deceive his benefactors. Cyrus asked what charge he had against the god and Croesus told him the whole story of his projects, the oracle's answers, and the offerings he had sent, especially emphasizing the encouragement from the oracle that had led him to make war on Persia. At the end, Croesus asked for permission to reproach the god and Cyrus granted it, saying he would grant whatever else Croesus asked of him. Croesus then sent some Lydians to Delphi with instructions to lay his fetters on the temple threshold and ask the god if he was not ashamed of encouraging Croesus to start a war with Persia, of which the fetters were the first-fruits, and if it was the custom of the Greek gods to be ungrateful.
91. The Lydians went to Delphi and delivered their message, to which the Pythia replied, "It is not possible even for a god to escape the decree of destiny. Croesus has been punished for the sin of his fifth ancestor, who, when he was one of the bodyguard of the Heraclides, joined in a woman's fraud and wrongfully seized the throne. Apollo wanted the fall of Sardis to happen after Croesus' lifetime, but the Fates would not allow it. Apollo delayed the taking of Sardis for three years, so Croesus was a prisoner three years later than his destiny. Apollo also saved him from the burning pile. Croesus had no right to complain about the oracular answer he received. If he had been wise, he would have sent again and asked which empire was meant, his or Cyrus', but he didn't understand or take the trouble to seek enlightenment, so he only has himself to blame for the result. He also misunderstood the last answer about the mule, which was Cyrus. Cyrus' parents were of different races and conditions, his mother a Median princess and daughter of King Astyages, and his father a Persian and a subject. When the Lydians returned to Sardis and communicated the Pythia's answer to Croesus, he admitted his fault, not the god's. This is how Ionia was first conquered and the empire of Croesus brought to an end.
92. Croesus made many offerings in various parts of Greece, such as a golden tripod dedicated to Ismenian Apollo at Thebes in Boeotia, golden heifers and columns at Ephesus, and a huge shield in gold at the temple of Pronaia in Delphi. These offerings were still around in my day, but many others had perished, including those he dedicated at Branchidae in Milesia, which were said to be equal in weight and in all respects like those at Delphi. The Delphian presents and those sent to Amphiaraus were from his own private property, the first-fruits of his inheritance from his father. His other offerings came from the riches of an enemy who had plotted to give the crown of Lydia to Pantaleon, a son of Alyattes by a different mother than Croesus. When Croesus obtained the kingly dignity, he seized the man and broke him upon the wheel. He then used the man's property, which he had previously devoted to the gods, in the way mentioned above. That's all I'll say about his offerings.
93. Unlike most other countries, Lydia offers few wonders for the historian to describe, except for the gold-dust washed down from the range of Tmolus. However, it does have one structure of immense size, second only to the monuments of Egypt and Babylon: the tomb of Alyattes, the father of Croesus. Its base is formed of immense blocks of stone, with the rest being a vast mound of earth. It was built by the joint labour of the tradesmen, handicraftsmen, and courtesans of Sardis, and had five stone pillars at the top, each inscribed with how much of the work was done by each class of workpeople. It was found that the courtesans had done the most work. The daughters of the common people in Lydia all pursue this trade to collect money for their dowries, and continue it until they marry. The tomb is six stades and two plethra in circumference, and thirteen plethra in breadth. Close by is a large lake, which the Lydians call the Lake Gygaea, and say never dries up.
94. The Lydians and Greeks have similar customs, except for how they raise their girls. It is believed that the Lydians were the first to use gold and silver coins and to sell goods by retail. They also claim to have invented all the games that they share with the Greeks, except for tables. According to their story, during the time of Atys, son of Manes, there was a great famine in Lydia. The people tried various remedies, such as playing dice, huckle-bones, and ball, to distract themselves from hunger. This went on for eighteen years, but the famine did not pass. So the king decided to divide the people in two and have them draw lots; one half would stay and the other would leave the land, led by the king's son, Tyrrhenus. The emigrants built ships and sailed away in search of new homes and sustenance. They eventually arrived in Umbria, where they built cities and changed their name from Lydians to Tyrrhenians.
95. So far, I have been discussing how the Lydians were conquered by the Persians. Now I must ask who this Cyrus was, and how the Persians became the rulers of Asia. I will rely on Persian sources that aim to tell the truth, rather than exaggerate Cyrus' accomplishments. There are three other versions of the story, but mine is different. The Assyrians had been in control of Upper Asia for 520 years when the Medes revolted and fought for their freedom. They fought bravely and won, inspiring other nations to revolt and reclaim their independence.
96. The nations across the land were blessed with self-government, but eventually fell under the rule of kings. One such king was Deioces, son of Phraortes, a wise man who desired to gain the sovereign power. To do this, he implemented a plan. At the time, the Medes lived in scattered villages without any central authority, and lawlessness was rampant. Deioces, already a respected figure in his village, worked hard to practice justice among his peers. He believed that justice and injustice were in constant conflict, and his efforts paid off. His fellow villagers noticed his integrity and chose him to settle their disputes. His reputation spread to the surrounding villages, who had been suffering from unfair judgments. When they heard of Deioces' fairness and equity, they eagerly sought his help in their quarrels and suits, until they trusted no one else.
97. As complaints against him kept growing due to his reputation for fairness, Deioces decided he no longer wanted to hear cases and stopped showing up to his seat of justice. "It's not in my best interest to spend my whole day dealing with other people's problems," he said. This caused a new wave of crime and lawlessness, so the Medes gathered from all over to discuss the situation. "We can't keep living like this," they said. "Let's appoint a king so the land can be governed properly and we can focus on our own lives instead of having to leave our country because of the chaos." Everyone agreed and they chose a king.
98. To decide who should be chosen for the office, the people began debating Deioces' merits and soon agreed he should be king. He asked for a palace suitable for his rank and a guard for his person, and the Medes complied. Once settled on the throne, he requested they build a single great city, disregarding the small towns they had lived in before, and make the new capital their main focus. The Medes obeyed and built the city of Agbatana, with walls of great size and strength, rising in circles one within the other. The outer wall was almost the same size as Athens', and its battlements were painted white, the next black, the third scarlet, the fourth blue, and the fifth orange. The two last walls had their battlements coated with silver and gold.
99. Deioces had fortifications built around his palace and required the people to build their dwellings outside the walls. When the town was finished, he set up a ceremonial to protect himself from his peers, who were of the same social standing and no less capable than him. He made it a crime to laugh or spit in his presence and forbade anyone from having direct access to him, instead requiring all communication to go through messengers. He believed that if his peers saw him frequently, they would be jealous and likely to conspire against him, but if they didn't see him, they would think he was a different person altogether.
100. After consolidating his power and taking his seat on the throne, Deioces continued to dispense justice with the same rigor. Causes were written down and sent to the king, who would render his verdict and communicate it to the parties involved. He also had spies and informants throughout his kingdom, and if he heard of any injustice, he would summon the perpetrator and mete out the appropriate punishment.
101. Deioces united the Medes into one nation and ruled over them. The Medes were made up of the Busae, Paretaceni, Struchates, Arizanti, Budii, and Magi tribes.
102. After reigning for 53 years, Deioces was succeeded by his son Phraortes. Unsatisfied with a dominion limited to the Medes, Phraortes attacked the Persians and brought them under the Median yoke. With two powerful nations under his control, he then set out to conquer Asia, one province at a time. His next target was the Assyrians, who had been the lords of Asia but were now alone due to the revolt and desertion of their allies. Despite this, their internal condition was still strong. Phraortes attacked them, but perished in the expedition with most of his army after ruling the Medes for 22 years.
103. Upon the death of Phraortes, his son Cyaxares took the throne. He was even more warlike than his ancestors and was the first to organize an Asiatic army, dividing the troops into companies of spearmen, archers, and cavalry, who had previously been mixed together. Cyaxares fought against the Lydians in the battle when the day suddenly turned to night and brought all of Asia beyond the Halys under his rule. He gathered all the nations under his power and marched against Nineveh, hoping to avenge his father. A battle ensued and the Assyrians were defeated, and Cyaxares had already begun the siege when a horde of Scyths, led by their king Madyes, son of Prtotohyes, invaded Asia in pursuit of the Cimmerians they had driven out of Europe and entered the Median territory.
104. It takes a lightly-equipped traveller thirty days to travel from the Palus Maeotis to the river Phasis and the Colchians. From Colchis, you can quickly cross into Media, as there is only one nation, the Saspirians, in between. However, the Scythians did not take this route; instead, they took the longer, upper route, keeping the Caucasus on their right. When they invaded Media, they were met with resistance from the Medes, who were defeated and lost their empire. The Scythians then became the masters of Asia.
105. After setting out with the intention of invading Egypt, the Scythians reached Palestine, where Psammetichus, the Egyptian king, met them with gifts and prayers and convinced them to go no further. As they returned, some of them who lagged behind pillaged the temple of Celestial Venus in Ascalon, Syria, which is the oldest temple to the goddess. The Cyprians themselves admit that their temple was built in imitation of it, and the one in Cythera was erected by the Phoenicians from this part of Syria. The goddess punished the Scythians who plundered the temple with a female sickness that still affects their descendants. They acknowledge that they suffer from it because of their actions, and travelers to Scythia can witness the disease for themselves. Those afflicted are called Enarees.
106. The Scythians ruled Asia for 28 years, during which their arrogance and cruelty caused destruction everywhere. In addition to the regular taxes, they imposed extra levies at their own discretion, and they pillaged the land, taking whatever they could. Eventually, Cyaxares and the Medes invited most of them to a feast and got them drunk with wine, then slaughtered them. The Medes regained their empire, which was the same size as before, and captured Nineveh (which I will tell you about in another story) and all of Assyria except Babylon. After this, Cyaxares died, having reigned over the Medes, including the time of the Scythian rule, for 40 years.
107. Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, became king and had a daughter named Mandane. He had a dream about her that was so powerful it filled him with terror: a stream of water flowed from her that was so vast it flooded the whole of Asia. He consulted the Magi, who interpreted the dream for him, and he was so scared of it coming true that he refused to marry her off to any of the Medes of suitable rank. Instead, he married her to a Persian of good family, but of a quiet temper, whom he saw as much inferior to a Mede of even middle condition.
108. Cambyses married Mandane and brought her home, and in the same year Astyages had a dream that a vine grew from his daughter's womb and covered all of Asia. He consulted the Magian interpreters, who said the dream meant that Mandane's child would rule Asia instead of him, so he sent for her and set a guard over her, as she was close to giving birth. When Cyrus was born, Astyages called Harpagus, his most trusted Mede, and said, "Harpagus, I'm asking you to do something for me. Don't betray me for anyone else's sake, or you'll bring destruction on yourself. Take this child and kill him in your home, then bury him however you want." Harpagus replied, "I've never disobeyed you before, and I won't start now. If that's what you want, I'll serve you with all my diligence."
109. Harpagus wept as he took the child, clothed in the garb of death, back to his home. When he arrived, he told his wife what Astyages had said. She asked, "What is it in your heart to do?" He replied, "I won't do what Astyages requires. He may be mad, but I won't help him with this murder. I can't kill the boy because he's my own kin and Astyages is old and has no son. If his daughter inherits the crown when he dies, I'll be in danger. The child must die, but someone from Astyages' family must take his life, not me or mine."
110. Harpagus sent a messenger to fetch Mitradates, one of Astyages' herdsmen, whose pastures were in the mountains full of wild beasts. Mitradates was married to one of Astyages' female slaves, Spaco, which is Greek for Cyno, since "Spaca" means "bitch" in the Median language. The mountains were north of Agbatana, near the Euxine. The part of Media bordering the Saspirians was mountainous and covered in forests, while the rest of the Median territory was flat. When Mitradates arrived, Harpagus said, "Astyages wants you to take this child and put him in the wildest part of the hills, where he'll die quickly. He said if you don't kill the boy and he escapes, he'll put you to the most painful death. I'm here to make sure the child is exposed."
111. The herdsman, hearing this, took the child in his arms and returned the way he had come until he reached the folds. His wife, who had been expecting to give birth any day, had just delivered a child in his absence. Both the herdsman and his wife were anxious about each other, the former fearful because his wife was so close to her due date, the woman alarmed because it was unusual for her husband to be summoned by Harpagus. When he entered the house, his wife, surprised by his unexpected arrival, was the first to speak and asked why Harpagus had called him in such a hurry. "My wife," he said, "when I got to the town, I saw and heard things I wish I had never seen. Everyone was crying in Harpagus's house and it scared me, but I went in. As soon as I stepped inside, I saw a baby lying on the floor, panting and whimpering, covered in gold and wearing clothes of such beautiful colors. Harpagus saw me and immediately ordered me to take the child in my arms and carry him off to the mountains where the wild beasts are most plentiful. He told me it was the king himself who ordered it and threatened me with terrible things if I failed. So I took the child and carried him along. I thought it might be the son of one of the household slaves. I was certainly surprised to see the gold and the beautiful baby clothes and I couldn't understand why there was such weeping in Harpagus's house. Soon, as I was walking, I found out the truth. They sent a servant with me to show me the way out of the town and to leave the baby in my hands. He told me that the child's mother is the king's daughter Mandane and his father Cambyses, the son of Cyrus, and that the king orders him to be killed. And here he is."
112. The herdsman uncovered the infant and showed it to his wife, who was overwhelmed by the child's beauty and burst into tears. She clung to her husband's knees and begged him not to expose the baby, but he said Harpagus would send people to check and he would be killed if he disobeyed. When she failed to persuade him, she said, "If you must expose a child on the mountains, take the stillborn one I just had and put it on the hills. We can raise the daughter of Astyages' child as our own. That way, you won't be charged with unfaithfulness to your lord and we won't have done badly for ourselves. Our dead baby will have a royal funeral and this living child won't be deprived of life."
113. The herdsman thought this was the best course of action, so he acted without delay. He gave the child he had intended to kill to his wife and put his own dead child in the cradle, dressing it in the other child's expensive clothes. He left it in the most remote part of the mountain range. After three days, he left one of his helpers to watch the body and went to Harpagus's house to show him the corpse. Harpagus sent some of his most trusted bodyguards to view the body and, once satisfied, ordered the funeral. The herdsman's child was buried and the other child, who would later be known as Cyrus, was taken by the herdsman's wife and raised under a different name.
114. When the boy was ten, an accident revealed his true identity. He was playing in the village with the other boys his age when they chose him, the cowherd's son, as their king. He assigned them tasks, but the son of Artembares, a Mede of distinction, refused to obey. Cyrus told the other boys to take him into custody and whipped him severely. Artembares, outraged by the treatment of his son, went to Astyages with him and pointed to the boy's shoulders, exclaiming, "Look, oh king, how your slave, the son of a cowherd, has insulted us!"
115. When Astyages saw and heard this, he wanted to avenge Artembares' son and summoned the cowherd and his boy. When they appeared before him, he fixed his gaze on Cyrus and said, "You, the son of such a lowly man, dared to act so disrespectfully to the son of that noble, one of the highest in my court?" Cyrus replied, "My lord, I only treated him as he deserved. I was chosen king in our village's game because the other boys thought I was the best for it. He was one of the boys who chose me. Everyone else followed my orders, but he refused and made fun of them until he got what he deserved. If I deserve punishment for this, I'm ready to accept it."
116. Astyages was struck with suspicion when he heard the boy speaking, thinking he saw something in his face that resembled his own. The boy's nobleness and age seemed to match the time when his grandchild was exposed. Astyages was astonished and couldn't speak for a while. Finally, he told Artembares, "I promise to settle this business so neither you nor your son will have any cause to complain," and Artembares left. The attendants led Cyrus into an inner room and Astyages asked the herdsman where he got the boy and who gave him to him. The herdsman said the boy was his own child and the mother was still alive with him in his house. Astyages said he was very ill-advised to bring himself into such trouble and signaled his bodyguard to grab him. As they dragged him to the rack, the herdsman told the whole story from the beginning, not concealing anything, and begged the king for forgiveness.
117. Astyages was furious with Harpagus when he found out the truth from the herdsman. He ordered his guards to bring Harpagus to him and asked, "How did you kill my daughter's child, Harpagus, that I gave you to take care of?" Seeing the cowherd in the room, Harpagus knew he couldn't lie, so he replied, "Your Majesty, when you gave me the child, I thought of a way to do your bidding without getting my hands dirty with your daughter's and your own blood. I called this cowherd and gave the child to him, telling him that you had ordered it to be put to death. I also told him to take it to the mountains and stay there until it died. I threatened him with punishment if he didn't do as I said. After the child died, I sent some of my most trusted eunuchs to view the body and then I had it buried. That's the truth, Your Majesty, and that's how the child died."
118. Harpagus related the story plainly and without embellishment, and Astyages, hiding his anger, repeated the cowherd's words to him. "So the boy is alive," he said, "and it's for the best. His fate was a great sorrow to me, and my daughter's reproaches went to my heart. Fortune has been kind to us. Go home and send your son to be with the new comer. Tonight, I'm sacrificing thank-offerings to the gods for the child's safety, and I expect you to be my guest at the banquet."
119. Harpagus bowed in respect and went home delighted that his disobedience had worked out so well and he was invited to a banquet in celebration. He immediately called for his thirteen-year-old son, his only child, and told him to go to the palace and do whatever Astyages commanded. He then shared the good news with his wife. Astyages took the son of Harpagus and killed him, cutting him into pieces and roasting and boiling them. When the banquet began, Harpagus and the other guests were served joints of meat, but on Harpagus' table was only the flesh of his son, minus the hands, feet, and head, which were in a basket. After Harpagus had eaten his fill, Astyages asked him how he enjoyed the meal. Harpagus replied that he had enjoyed it immensely. Then, the servants brought him the basket with the hands, feet, and head of his son and asked him to take out what he wanted. Harpagus uncovered the basket and saw the remains of his son, but he remained composed and, when asked by Astyages what beast's flesh he had been eating, he answered that he knew and that whatever the king did was agreeable. He took the uneaten pieces of flesh and went home, presumably to bury the remains.
120. Astyages asked the Magi, who had previously interpreted his dream in a way that scared him, what they thought of the fact that Cyrus, his grandchild, had escaped and was living in the country, ruling as a king with guards, doorkeepers, messengers, and other officers. The Magi replied that if the boy had become king without any craft or contrivance, then Astyages had nothing to fear from him, as oracles and dreams often have unimportant fulfillments. Astyages agreed, but asked the Magi to counsel him for the safety of his house. The Magi said that it was in their best interest for Astyages to remain on the throne, as if Cyrus became king, the Medes would lose their freedom and be despised by the Persians. They advised Astyages to banish his fears and send Cyrus to his parents in Persia.
121. Astyages was pleased with their response and called Cyrus to him. "My child," he said, "I was misguided by a dream that didn't come true. You were lucky to be saved from that mistake. Go to Persia with a light heart. I will provide an escort for you. When you reach your destination, you will see your father and mother, who are very different from Mitradates the cowherd and his wife."
122. Astyages dismissed his grandchild with these words, and when he arrived at the house of Cambyses, his parents embraced him heartily, having always believed he had died shortly after birth. They asked him how he had escaped, and he told them he had only recently learned the truth of his history while travelling from Media. He had been sure he was the son of the king's cowherd, but the king's escort had informed him of the truth. He spoke fondly of the cowherd's wife who had raised him, always referring to her as "Cyno". His parents, hearing the name, wanted to convince the Persians that his preservation was due to divine providence, so they spread the rumor that Cyrus had been suckled by a bitch when he was exposed. This was the only source of the rumor.
123. When Cyrus grew up and became known as the bravest and most popular of all his peers, Harpagus, who wanted to avenge himself on Astyages, began to court him with gifts and messages. His own rank was too low for him to hope to get revenge without outside help, so when he saw Cyrus, whose wrongs were similar to his own, growing up to be the avenger he needed, he set out to get his support and aid. He had already persuaded the great Median nobles, who were offended by their king's harsh rule, that the best plan would be to put Cyrus at their head and dethrone Astyages. Ready to revolt, Harpagus wanted to tell Cyrus, who still lived in Persia, but the roads between Media and Persia were guarded, so he had to come up with a way to send word secretly. He took a hare, cut open its belly without damaging the fur, slipped in a letter with what he wanted to say, and then carefully sewed up the paunch. He gave the hare to one of his most faithful slaves, disguised as a hunter with nets, and sent him off to Persia to take the game as a present to Cyrus, telling him to paunch the animal himself and let no one be present.
124. Cyrus cut open the hare and found the letter inside. He read it and it said, "My son, Cambyses, the gods have been watching over you or you would never have made it through your many adventures. Now is the time to avenge yourself on Astyages, your murderer. He wanted you dead, but you're still alive thanks to the gods and me. I'm sure you remember what he did to you and what I suffered because I gave you to the cowherd instead of killing you. Listen to me and do as I say and the whole empire of Astyages will be yours. Raise the standard of revolt in Persia and march straight to Media. Whether Astyages appoints me to command his forces against you or someone else, it will all go as you wish. They will be the first to abandon him and join your side to overthrow his power. We are ready on our end, so you just do your part quickly."
125. Upon receiving the news in the letter, Cyrus pondered how to best convince the Persians to revolt. After much thought, he wrote his plan on a scroll and called an assembly of the Persians. He unrolled the scroll and read that Astyages had appointed him their general. "So," he declared, "I command you to go and get your reaping-hooks." With that, he dismissed the assembly. The Persian nation was made up of many tribes, the most important of which were the Pasargadae, the Maraphians, and the Maspians, with the Achaemenidae, from which all Perseid kings descended, being one of their clans. The other Persian tribes were the Panthialaeans, the Derusiaeans, the Germanians, who were farmers, the Daans, the Mardians, the Dropicans, and the Sagartians, who were nomads.
126. When Cyrus received orders to lead the Persians to a tract of land about eighteen or twenty furlongs each way, covered with thorns, and clear it before the day was out, they accomplished the task. The next day, he collected all his father's flocks, both sheep and goats, and all his oxen, and slaughtered them, and prepared a feast for the entire Persian army with wine and bread of the choicest kinds. He bade them recline upon the grass and enjoy themselves. After the feast was over, he asked them which they liked better, yesterday's work or today's. They replied that yesterday brought them nothing but what was bad, but today everything was good. Cyrus seized on their reply and said, "You men of Persia, if you choose to listen to me, you can enjoy these and ten thousand similar delights, and never have to do any slavish toil. But if you don't listen, prepare yourselves for unnumbered toils as hard as yesterday's. Revolt from Astyages without a moment's delay and be free. I feel that I am destined by Providence to liberate you, and I'm sure you are no less brave than the Medes."
127. The Persians had been longing to break free from the Median rule, and when they found a leader, they were ecstatic. When Astyages heard of Cyrus' actions, he sent a messenger to summon him. Cyrus replied, "Tell Astyages I'll be there sooner than he'd like." Astyages, seemingly out of his mind, armed his people and appointed Harpagus as their general, despite the wrongs he had done him. When the two armies clashed, only a few of the Medes who weren't in the know fought; the rest either openly defected to the Persians or pretended to be scared and ran away.
128. When Astyages heard of the shameful flight and dispersal of his army, he threatened Cyrus, saying, "Cyrus won't be celebrating for long!" He then seized the Magian interpreters who had convinced him to let Cyrus go and impaled them. He then armed all the Medes who were still in the city, both young and old, and led them against the Persians in a battle which he lost, his army being destroyed and himself falling into the enemy's hands.
129. Harpagus approached Astyages, gloating and taunting him. He reminded him of the supper where he had been served his son's flesh, and asked Astyages how he liked being a slave instead of a king. Astyages looked him in the eye and asked why he was taking credit for Cyrus' revolt. Harpagus replied that it was his letter that had caused the revolt, so he deserved the credit. Astyages declared that Harpagus was both foolish and unjust: foolish for not taking the crown for himself if the revolt was his doing, and unjust for making the Medes slaves of the Persians, who had been their subjects, because of the wrong he was complaining about.
130. After a reign of 35 years, Astyages lost his crown and the Medes, due to his cruelty, were brought under the rule of the Persians. Their empire had lasted 128 years, except for the time when the Scythians had dominion. The Medes later revolted from Darius, but were defeated in battle and again reduced to subjection. It was then that the Persians, under Cyrus, revolted from the Medes and became the rulers of Asia. Cyrus kept Astyages at his court for the rest of his life without doing him any further harm. This is how Cyrus came to the throne. Later, he was attacked by Croesus and, as I have previously related, overthrew him, making him master of all of Asia.
131. The Persians have no images of gods, no temples or altars, believing these to be signs of foolishness. This is likely because they don't think of gods as having the same nature as humans, as the Greeks do. Instead, they climb the highest mountains to offer sacrifice to Jupiter, which is the name they give to the sky. They also offer sacrifice to the sun, moon, earth, fire, water, and winds, which are the only gods they've worshipped since ancient times. Later, they adopted the worship of Urania from the Arabians and Assyrians, who call her Mylitta and Alitta, respectively.
132. When sacrificing to the gods, the Persians do not raise altars, light fires, or pour libations; there is no flute music, no wearing of chaplets, and no consecrated barley-cake. Instead, the person wishing to sacrifice brings their victim to a spot of ground that is free from pollution and calls out the name of the god they are offering to. They usually have a wreath of myrtle around their turban. The sacrificer must not only pray for their own blessings, but also for the welfare of the king and the entire Persian people. They cut the victim into pieces, boil the flesh, and lay it out on the softest herbage they can find, usually trefoil. Then, a Magus comes forward and chants a hymn that recounts the origin of the gods. It is not allowed to offer sacrifice without a Magus present. After a short wait, the sacrificer takes the flesh of the victim away with them and can do whatever they wish with it.
133. On their birthdays, people celebrate more than any other day of the year. They usually have a more abundant feast than usual. Wealthier Persians have whole oxen, horses, camels, and donkeys cooked and served. Poorer people use smaller animals. They eat little solid food, but plenty of desserts, which are served in small portions, which is why they say that "the Greeks, when they eat, leave hungry, since nothing worth mentioning is served after the main course; if there was more, they wouldn't stop eating." They love wine and drink a lot of it. It's forbidden to vomit or go to the bathroom in front of someone else. They usually discuss important matters while drunk, and the next day, when they're sober, the master of the house presents the decision they made the night before. If it's approved, they act on it; if not, they set it aside. Sometimes, however, they are sober when they first deliberate, but in this case they always reconsider the matter while drinking.
134. When two people meet in the street, you can tell if they are of equal rank by whether they kiss each other on the lips or the cheek. If one is of lower rank, they will prostrate themselves on the ground. Nations tend to honor their closest neighbors the most, and the further away they are, the less esteem they have for them. This is because they view themselves as superior to the rest of mankind, and those closer to them as more excellent. This is the same order the Medes and Persians follow in their distribution of honor. They have a progressive scale of administration and government, with the Medes ruling over all and the nations on their borders governing those beyond them.
135. No nation is as quick to adopt foreign customs as the Persians. They prefer the dress of the Medes to their own, and in battle they wear Egyptian breastplates. As soon as they hear of any luxury, they make it their own, and so they have learned "unnatural lust" from the Greeks. Each Persian has several wives and an even larger number of concubines.
136. It is seen as the greatest proof of manly excellence to have many sons, and the king sends rich gifts to the man who can show the largest number, believing that number is strength. From the age of five to twenty, their sons are taught only three things: to ride, to draw the bow, and to speak the truth. Until they reach five, they are kept away from their father's sight, so that if the child dies young, the father will not be too affected by the loss.
137. In my opinion, it is wise to follow the rule that the king should not execute anyone for a single mistake, and that no Persian should punish a slave too harshly for a single offense; instead, the good deeds of the offender should be weighed against their misdeeds, and if the latter outweigh the former, then the aggrieved party can proceed with punishment.
138. The Persians believe that no one has ever killed their own father or mother; they are certain that if the truth were uncovered, the child would either be a changeling or the result of adultery. It is unlikely, they say, that the real father would be killed by their own child.
139. It is forbidden to talk about anything that is forbidden to do. Persians believe that lying is the most disgraceful thing in the world and owing a debt is the next worst, as debtors are often forced to lie. If a Persian has leprosy, they are not allowed to enter a city or interact with other Persians, as they are believed to have sinned against the sun. Foreigners with this disorder must leave the country, and even white pigeons are sometimes driven away for the same reason. They never defile a river with their bodily secretions or even wash their hands in one, as they have a great reverence for rivers. There is another peculiarity that the Persians have not noticed, but I have: all of their names, which express some bodily or mental excellence, end with the same letter - the letter called "San" by the Dorians and "Sigma" by the Ionians. If you look, you will find that all Persian names end with this letter.
140. I can say with certainty, from my own experience, that the Persians have a custom that is not openly discussed concerning their dead. It is said that a male Persian's body is not buried until it has been torn by a dog or a bird of prey. This is certainly true of the Magi, who practice it without any secrecy. The bodies are covered in wax and then buried in the ground. The Magi are a very unique people, unlike the Egyptian priests and any other people. The Egyptian priests only kill animals for sacrifice, while the Magi kill all kinds of animals, except dogs and men, and even seem to enjoy it. They kill ants, snakes, and other flying or crawling creatures. Since this has been their custom for a long time, let them keep to it. I will now return to my story.
141. After the Persians conquered Lydia, the Ionian and Aeolian Greeks sent ambassadors to Cyrus at Sardis to become his subjects, just as they had been under Croesus. Cyrus listened to their proposal and responded with a fable. "Once there was a piper walking by the sea," he said, "and he saw some fish. He started to pipe, thinking they would come out of the water, but they didn't. So he threw a net in the water and caught a bunch of fish. The fish started to jump and dance, but the piper said, 'You didn't want to dance when I piped, so why are you dancing now?'" Cyrus was angry because the Ionians and Aeolians had refused to revolt from Croesus when he asked them to, but now they were offering their allegiance. The Ionians fortified their towns and held meetings at the Panionium, except for the Milesians, who had a separate treaty with Cyrus that allowed them the same terms they had under Croesus. The other Ionians decided to send ambassadors to Sparta to ask for help.
142. The Ionians of Asia, who meet at the Panionium, have built their cities in a region with the most beautiful air and climate in the world. No other region is as blessed as Ionia, neither above it, below it, east, nor west. Other countries either have overly cold and damp climates, or oppressive heat and drought. The Ionians do not all speak the same language, but use four different dialects in different places. Towards the south, their first city is Miletus, followed by Myus and Priene, all three in Caria and speaking the same dialect. The cities in Lydia are Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedus, Teos, Clazomenae, and Phocaea, and the inhabitants of these towns have a dialect of their own. The remaining three Ionian towns are two in isles, Samos and Chios, and one on the mainland, Erythrae. Chios and Erythrae have the same dialect, while Samos has a language unique to itself. These are the four varieties of which I spoke.
143. The Milesians were in no danger of attack since Cyrus had taken them into alliance, and the islanders were safe since Phoenicia was still independent of Persia and the Persians were not a seafaring people. The Milesians had separated from the common cause because the Ionic tribe was the weakest and least esteemed of all the Hellenic tribes, with only Athens as a notable state. Most of the other Ionic states were so ashamed of the name that they abandoned it, but the twelve cities in Asia proudly kept it and named their temple the Panionium, only allowing Smyrna to join.
144. The Dorians of the Pentapolis (formerly known as the Doric Hexapolis) excluded all their Dorian neighbours from their temple, the Triopium, and even some of their own people who had broken the customs of the place. In the games held in honour of the Triopian Apollo, the victors were awarded tripods of brass, which were to be dedicated to the god in the temple and not taken away. Agasicles of Halicarnassus, however, disregarded this rule and took the tripod home to hang on his wall. As punishment, the other five cities - Lindus, Ialyssus, Cameirus, Cos, and Cnidus - revoked Halicarnassus' right to enter the temple.
145. The Ionians founded twelve cities in Asia and refused to expand the number, likely because they had been divided into twelve states when they lived in the Peloponnese, just as the Achaeans, who drove them out, are today. The first Achaean city after Sicyon was Pellene, followed by Aegeira, Aegae on the Crathis (a stream that never runs dry, from which the Italian Crathis got its name), Bura, Helice (where the Ionians fled after their defeat by the Achaean invaders), Aegium, Rhypes, Patreis, Phareis, Olenus on the Peirus (a large river), Dyme, and Tritaeeis. All of these cities were port towns except for the last two, which were inland.
146. Now known as Achaea, the region was formerly Ionia, divided into twelve divisions. When the Ionians arrived in Asia, they founded twelve states, but this does not mean they were more Ionian or better born than the rest. In fact, many of them were Abantians from Euboea, who weren't even called Ionians. Additionally, the emigration included Minyae from Orchomenus, Cadmeians, Dryopians, Phocians from the cities of Phocis, Molossians, Arcadian Pelasgi, Dorians from Epidaurus, and many other distinct tribes. Even the Ionians who came from the Prytaneum of Athens, believing themselves to be the purest of all, married Carian girls whose fathers they had killed. As a result, these women made a law, swearing an oath to observe it and pass it down to their daughters, that none should ever sit at the table with their husband or call him by name. This all happened at Miletus.
147. The kings the Ionians set over them were either Lycians, descended from Glaucus, son of Hippolochus, or Pylian Caucons, descended from Codrus, son of Melanthus, or from both families. The Ionians, however, valued the name more than any of the others, so let them be considered pure-bred Ionians, even though all who have their origin from Athens and celebrate the Apaturia are Ionians, except the Ephesians and Colophonians, who are excluded from it due to a certain act of bloodshed.
148. The Panionium, located in Mycale and facing north, was chosen by the Ionians and dedicated to Heliconian Neptune. Mycale is a promontory of the mainland that stretches out westward towards Samos, and it is where the Ionians from all their states gather to celebrate the Panionia. Festivals among the Ionians and all Greeks have names that end in the same letter, just like Persian proper names.
149. The Ionians have twelve towns, and the Aeolians have eleven ancient cities: Cyme (also known as Phriconis), Larissa, Neonteichus, Temnus, Cilla, Notium, Aegiroessa, Pitane, Aegaeae, Myrina, and Gryneia. Originally, the Aeolians had twelve cities on the mainland, like the Ionians, but the Ionians took Smyrna away from them. The soil in Aeolis is better than in Ionia, but the climate is not as pleasant.
150. The Colophonians had been involved in a rebellion in Smyrna, and as they were the weaker side, they were exiled. The Smyrnaeans welcomed the exiles, and when the citizens were celebrating a feast to Bacchus outside the walls, the exiles seized the opportunity and shut the gates, taking control of the town. The Aeolians of the other states came to their aid, and the Ionians agreed to give up all their possessions while the Aeolians surrendered the town. The expelled Smyrnaeans were given citizenship in the other Aeolian states.
151. All the Aeolic cities on the mainland, excluding those around Mount Ida, were part of this alliance. Lesbos had five cities, with Arisba, the sixth, taken by the Methymnaeans and its inhabitants enslaved. Tenedos had one city, and another was built on the Hundred Isles. The Aeolians of Lesbos and Tenedos, like the Ionian islanders, were not threatened at this time. The other Aeolians gathered in a common assembly and agreed to follow whatever course the Ionians took.
152. When the Ionians and Aeolians' deputies arrived in Sparta, they chose Pythermus, a Phocaean, to be their spokesperson. Pythermus donned a purple garment to draw a large audience and spoke at length, pleading with the Spartans to come to their aid. Despite his efforts, the Spartans voted against sending help. Nevertheless, the Lacedaemonians sent a penteconter to the Asiatic coast with some Spartans on board, presumably to keep an eye on Cyrus and Ionia. Upon arriving in Phocaea, they sent Lacrines, the most distinguished of their number, to Sardis to tell Cyrus, in the name of the Lacedaemonians, not to bother any Greek city, as they would not allow it.
153. Upon hearing the herald's speech, Cyrus asked some Greeks nearby who the Lacedaemonians were and how many of them there were that they would dare to send him such a notice. Upon receiving their reply, he turned to the Spartan herald and said, "I'm not afraid of any people who have a place in the middle of their city where they come together to lie and cheat each other. If I'm alive, the Spartans will have enough of their own troubles to worry about, without concerning themselves with the Ionians." Cyrus meant this as a reproach against all the Greeks, since they had marketplaces where they bought and sold, something the Persians never did since they didn't have a single market in their entire country. After this, Cyrus left Sardis, leaving the city in the hands of a Persian, Tabalus, and appointing a native, Pactyas, to collect the treasure of Croesus and the other Lydians and follow him. Cyrus himself headed towards Agbatana, taking Croesus with him, not considering the Ionians important enough to be his main focus. He had bigger plans; he wanted to personally wage war against Babylon, the Bactrians, the Sacae, and Egypt, so he decided to assign one of his generals the task of conquering the Ionians.
154. As soon as Cyrus left Sardis, Pactyas incited his countrymen to rebel against him and his deputy Tabalus. Pactyas used the vast treasures he had to hire mercenaries and enlist people from the coast to join his army. He marched on Sardis and besieged Tabalus, who barricaded himself in the citadel.
155. When Cyrus was on his way to Agbatana and heard the news, he returned to Croesus and said, "What will become of this, Croesus? It looks like the Lydians won't stop causing trouble for themselves and others. Maybe it would be best to sell them all into slavery. It's like I killed the father and spared the child. I took you, who were more than a father to your people, and gave them their city. Can I be surprised they rebelled?" Cyrus expressed his thoughts, and Croesus, worried Cyrus would destroy Sardis, replied, "My king, your words are reasonable, but please don't let your anger take over and destroy an innocent city. I'm the one who caused the first problem and I'm paying the price. Pactyas caused the second, and he's the one you gave Sardis to. Please forgive the Lydians and to make sure they never rebel against you again, forbid them to keep weapons of war, make them wear tunics under their cloaks and buskins on their legs, and have them teach their sons cithern-playing, harping, and shop-keeping. That way you'll see them become more like women than men, and you won't have to worry about them revolting against you."
156. Croesus knew that the Lydians would be better off if they weren't sold into slavery, so he gave his advice to Cyrus, hoping that he could persuade him to change his mind. He was also afraid that the Lydians might revolt against the Persians in the future and bring destruction upon themselves. Cyrus was pleased with the suggestion and called upon a Mede named Mazares to carry out Croesus' instructions. He commanded Mazares to sell all those who had attacked Sardis into slavery and to bring Pactyas back alive. After giving these orders, Cyrus continued his journey to the Persian territory.
157. When news of the approaching army sent against him reached Pactyas, he fled in terror to Cyme. Upon arriving in Sardis, Mazares, the Median general, found that Pactyas and his troops had gone and immediately forced the Lydians to obey the orders of his master and change their way of life. He then sent messengers to Cyme, demanding that Pactyas be handed over to him. The Cymaeans decided to consult the god at Branchidae, located in the territory of Miletus above the port of Panormus. This oracle, established in ancient times, was often consulted by both the Ionians and Aeolians.
158. The Cymaeans sent their representatives to the shrine to ask what the gods wanted them to do with the Lydian, Pactyas. The oracle replied that they should give him to the Persians. The messengers returned with this answer and the people of Cymd were ready to comply, but Aristodicus, son of Heraclides, a prominent citizen, stopped them. He said he didn't trust the response and thought the messengers had reported it wrong. Eventually, another delegation, including Aristodicus, was sent to ask the same question about Pactyas.
159. When Aristodicus, speaking on behalf of the whole group, arrived at the shrine of the god, he addressed the oracle: "Pactyas the Lydian has come to us for sanctuary, but the Persians are demanding we give him up. We fear their power, but we won't surrender him until we know your opinion." The oracle replied that they should give him up, so Aristodicus began to take all the nests of young sparrows and other birds he could find around the temple. Suddenly, a voice from the inner sanctuary said, "What are you doing? Are you tearing my suppliants from my temple?" Aristodicus replied, "Are you really protecting your suppliants and commanding the Cymaeans to surrender a suppliant?" The god answered, "Yes, so that you may perish for your impiety and not come here again to consult my oracle about surrendering suppliants."
160. Upon receiving this response, the Cymaeans, not wanting to bring destruction upon themselves by giving up the man, and afraid of enduring a siege if they kept him, sent Pactyas away to Mytilene. Mazares then sent envoys to the Mytilenaeans to demand the fugitive, and they were preparing to give him up for a reward (I'm not sure how much, as the deal was not finalized). When the Cymaeans heard what the Mytilenaeans were doing, they sent a vessel to Lesbos and took Pactyas to Chios. The Chians dragged him from the temple of Minerva Poliuchus and gave him up to the Persians in exchange for the district of Atarneus, a tract of Mysia across from Lesbos. Thus, Pactyas fell into the hands of his pursuers, who kept a close watch on him so they could present him to Cyrus. For a long time afterwards, none of the Chians would use the barley of Atarneus to place on the heads of victims or make sacrificial cakes of the corn grown there, and the entire produce of the land was excluded from all their temples.
161. Mazares, after rescuing Pactyas from the Chians, waged war on those who had attacked Tabalus. He captured Priene and sold its inhabitants into slavery, then he plundered the Maeander plain and Magnesia, giving the spoils to his troops. Suddenly, he became ill and died.
162. Upon his death, Harpagus was sent to the coast to take command. He was of the Median race, the same man whom King Astyages of Media had feasted at the infamous banquet and who had helped Cyrus ascend the throne. Appointed by Cyrus to lead the war in the region, Harpagus invaded Ionia and captured cities by building mounds. He forced the enemy to stay within their fortifications and constructed mounds of earth against their walls, thus taking the towns. His first target was the city of Phocaea.
163. The Phocaeans were the first Greeks to embark on long voyages, introducing the Adriatic, Tyrrhenia, Iberia, and the city of Tartessus to the Greeks. They used a long penteconter, not the round-built merchant-ship, for their travels. When they arrived at Tartessus, the king, Arganthonius, took a liking to them. He reigned over the Tartessians for eighty years and lived to be 120. He wanted the Phocaeans to settle in his country, but when they refused, he gave them money to build a wall around their town. The wall was built with his aid and is many furlongs in circumference, constructed entirely of large blocks of stone skilfully fitted together.
164. Harpagus advanced on the Phocaeans with his army and laid siege to their city, offering them terms: "I will be content if you tear down one of your battlements and dedicate one dwelling-house to the king." The Phocaeans, not wanting to become slaves, asked for a day to consider their answer and requested Harpagus to withdraw his forces from the walls. He replied, "I know what you're planning, but I'll grant your request." The troops were withdrawn and the Phocaeans took advantage of their absence to launch their penteconters, loading them with their wives and children, household goods, and even the images of their gods, with all the votive offerings from the fanes except the paintings and the works in stone or brass, which were left behind. They set sail for Chios and when the Persians returned, they found an empty town.
165. When the Phocaeans arrived at Chios, they offered to buy the Oenussae Islands, but the Chians refused, worried that the Phocaeans would set up a factory there and keep their merchants out of the area. Since Arganthonius had passed away, the Phocaeans decided to sail to Cyrnus (Corsica), where twenty years earlier they had founded a city called Alalia, as per an oracle's instructions. Before they left, they returned to Phocaea and, catching the Persian troops that Harpagus had stationed there off guard, killed them all. They then cursed anyone who would abandon the armada, and dropped a heavy iron mass into the sea, swearing never to return to Phocaea until the mass resurfaced. However, as they were about to depart for Cyrnus, more than half of them were so overcome with sadness and a longing to see their city and homes again that they broke their oath and sailed back to Phocaea.
166. The Phocaeans who kept their oath continued their voyage and when they arrived at Cyrnus, they joined the earlier settlers at Alalia and built temples. For five years, they caused trouble for their neighbours by plundering and pillaging, until the Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians formed an alliance and sent a fleet of sixty ships each to attack the town. The Phocaeans manned their own sixty ships and met their enemy on the Sardinian sea. They won the battle, but it was a Pyrrhic victory; they lost forty ships and the remaining twenty were so damaged that they were no longer usable. The Phocaeans returned to Alalia, loaded their wives, children, and possessions onto the ships, and said goodbye to Cyrnus, sailing to Rhegium.
167. The Carthaginians and Tyrrhenians captured many of the Phocaeans from the forty destroyed vessels and cruelly stoned them to death on the coast. Whenever someone from the district of Agylla passed by the spot where the murdered Phocaeans lay, they would become distorted, suffer from palsy, or lose the use of some of their limbs. In response, the people of Agylla consulted the oracle at Delphi to ask how they could expiate their sin. The Pythoness instructed them to honour the dead Phocaeans with magnificent funeral rites and solemn games, both gymnic and equestrian. The other Phocaeans who had fled to Rhegium eventually founded the city of Vela in the district of Oenotria, based on the suggestion of a man from Posidonia that the oracle had not meant for them to set up a town in Cyrnus the island, but to set up the worship of Cyrnus the hero.
168. The people of Phocaea in Ionia had a similar experience to the people of Teos. Harpagus built a mound to the height of their defences, so they all took to the sea and sailed to Thrace, where they founded the city of Abdera. Timesius of Clazomenae had previously tried to colonise the area, but the Thracians had expelled him. To this day, the Teians of Abdera still worship him as a hero.
169. All the Ionians, except for Miletus, resisted Harpagus bravely, each fighting for their own defense, but one after another they were defeated and their cities taken. The inhabitants submitted, remaining in their countries and obeying their new lords. Miletus had made terms with Cyrus and so stayed at peace. This is how continental Ionia was reduced to servitude. When the Ionians of the islands saw their mainland brethren subjugated, they too, fearing the same fate, surrendered to Cyrus.
170. While the Ionians were in distress, they still held their meetings at the Panionium, and Bias of Priene, who was present at the festival, proposed a project of great wisdom that would have enabled the Ionians to become the most prosperous of the Greeks. He urged them to join together, sail to Sardinia, and found a single Pan-Ionic city, so they could escape slavery and become rulers of the largest island in the world. He saw no hope of them regaining their freedom if they stayed in Ionia. Before their misfortunes began, Thales of Miletus, of Phoenician descent, had suggested a different plan: to establish a single seat of government in Teos, which he said was the center of Ionia, and let the other cities keep their own laws as if they were independent states. This was also good advice.
171. After conquering the Ionians, Harpagus attacked the Carians, Caunians, and Lycians, forcing the Ionians and Aeolians to serve in his army. The Carians were a race who had come from the islands and were once subjects of King Minos, known as the Leleges. As far as I could find, they never had to pay tribute to anyone. They served on King Minos' ships whenever he needed them, and because he was a great conqueror, the Carians were the most famous nation on earth. They also invented three things that the Greeks later adopted: crests on helmets, devices on shields, and handles for shields. Before this, shields were held with a leather thong around the neck and shoulder. Later, the Carians were driven from the islands by the Ionians and Dorians and settled on the mainland. The Cretans tell a different story, claiming the Carians were the original inhabitants of the mainland and never had another name. They point to an ancient temple of Carian Jove in the country of the Mylasians, where the Mysians and Lydians are allowed to worship as brother races to the Carians. However, those of a different race, even if they use the Carian language, are not allowed in the temple.
172. I believe the Caunians are native to the area, but they claim to have come from Crete. It's hard to say if their language is more similar to the Carians or vice versa. What is certain is that their customs are very different from the Carians and all other people. They consider it a great honor for friends and people of the same age, regardless of gender or age, to gather in large groups and drink wine. One day, they decided to stop worshipping foreign gods and only honor their own ancestral gods. So, their young people took up arms, brandishing their spears and marched to the Calyndic border, shouting that they were expelling the foreign gods.
173. The Lycians are descended from the Cretans, who were once a barbarian people. When a quarrel arose between Sarpedon and Minos, two sons of Europa, over who should be king, Minos won and Sarpedon and his followers were exiled. They sailed to Asia and landed in the Milyan territory, which is now known as Lycia. As long as Sarpedon reigned, his followers were called Termilae, as the Lycians still are by their neighbours. But after Lycus, son of Pandion, who had been banished from Athens by his brother Aegeus, found refuge with Sarpedon in the country of the Termilae, they eventually came to be called Lycians. They have a mix of Cretan and Carian customs, but one that is unique to them is that they take the mother's name, not the father's. If you ask a Lycian who he is, he will give his own name, his mother's, and so on in the female line. Furthermore, if a free woman marries a slave, their children are full citizens, but if a free man marries a foreign woman or lives with a concubine, even if he is the most important person in the state, the children will not have the rights of citizenship.
174. The Carians submitted to Harpagus without putting up a fight, and the same was true of the Greeks living in Caria. Among them were the Cnidians, colonists from Lacedaemon, who lived in a district called Triopium, which was bordered by the Ceramic Gulf to the north and the channel to the south, leading to the islands of Syme and Rhodes. While Harpagus was conquering Ionia, the Cnidians tried to make their country an island by cutting through the narrow isthmus, which was only five furlongs wide. But the workers kept getting strange wounds, especially around their eyes, from the splintering of the rock. So they sent to Delphi to ask what was stopping them, and the oracle said, "Fence not the isthmus off, nor dig it through - Jove would have made an island, had he wished." So the Cnidians stopped digging and, when Harpagus arrived with his army, they surrendered without a fight.
175. Above Halicarnassus and further from the coast, the Pedasians lived. Whenever they or their neighbors were about to face misfortune, the priestess of Minerva would grow an ample beard. This had happened three times. They were the only people in Caria who resisted Harpagus for a while, giving him much trouble by fortifying a mountain called Lida. Eventually, however, they had to submit.
176. After his successes, Harpagus led his forces into the Xanthian plain, where the Lycians of Xanthus met him in the field. Though they were outnumbered, they fought bravely and performed many heroic feats. Eventually, they were overpowered and forced back to their city, where they gathered their families, treasures, and slaves and set the building ablaze. The Lycians then swore a terrible oath and charged the enemy, all of them dying in battle. The only Xanthians who remain today are eighty families who were away from the country at the time and thus survived. In this way, Xanthus was taken by Harpagus and Caunus fell into his hands as well, since the Caunians followed the example of the Lycians.
177. As Harpagus subjugated the lower parts of Asia, Cyrus himself conquered the upper regions, leaving no nation unscathed. I will omit most of these conquests and focus on those that gave him the most difficulty and are most noteworthy. After he had brought the rest of the continent under his control, he waged war on the Assyrians.
178. Assyria was home to many great cities, the most renowned and powerful of which was Babylon. After the fall of Nineveh, the seat of government had been moved there. Babylon was situated on a broad plain and was an exact square, measuring one hundred and twenty furlongs in length on each side, for a total of four hundred and eighty furlongs. It was the most magnificent city in the world. It was surrounded by a broad and deep moat filled with water, and a wall fifty royal cubits wide and two hundred cubits high (the royal cubit being three fingers' breadth longer than the common cubit).
179. As they dug the moat, the soil they got from the cutting was made into bricks and baked in kilns. Then they began to build the wall, using hot bitumen as cement and interspersing a layer of wattled reeds every thirtieth course of bricks. Along the edges of the wall, they constructed buildings of a single chamber facing each other, leaving enough room for a four-horse chariot to turn. The wall had a hundred gates, all of brass with brazen lintels and side-posts. The bitumen used in the work was brought from the Is, a small stream that flows into the Euphrates near the city of the same name, eight days' journey from Babylon. Lumps of bitumen were found in abundance in this river.
180. The Euphrates River divides the city in two, a broad, deep, and swift stream that rises in Armenia and empties into the Erythraean Sea. The city wall is brought down to the edge of the river on both sides, and a fence of burnt bricks runs along each bank. Most of the houses are three or four stories high, and the streets are all straight, including the cross streets that lead down to the river. At the end of these cross streets are low gates in the fence that line the river, made of brass and opening onto the water.
181. The city's main defence was its outer wall, but there was also a second, inner wall that was slightly thinner but just as strong. At the centre of each division of the town was a fortress. In one stood the palace of the kings, surrounded by a wall of great strength and size, and in the other was the sacred precinct of Jupiter Belus, a square enclosure two furlongs each way with gates of solid brass, which was still standing when I visited. In the middle of the precinct was a tower of solid masonry, a furlong in length and breadth, with a second tower on top of it, and a third on top of that, and so on up to eight. To get to the top, you had to take a winding path around the outside of the towers, and when you were about halfway up, there was a resting place with seats for people to take a break. On the topmost tower was a spacious temple, and inside the temple was a large, ornately decorated couch with a golden table beside it. There was no statue in the place, and the only person who stayed there at night was a single native woman, chosen by the deity from all the women of the land, according to the Chaldaeans, the priests of this god.
182. They claim, though I don't believe it, that the god comes down and sleeps on the couch in this chamber. It's similar to the story of what happens in Thebes, Egypt, where a woman spends the night in the temple of the Theban Jupiter, not allowed to interact with men. It's also like the practice in Patara, Lycia, where the priestess delivering oracles is locked in the temple every night, as there isn't always an oracle.
183. In the same precinct, there is a second temple with a golden figure of Jupiter sitting on a golden throne and table. The Chaldaeans told me the gold weighed 800 talents. Outside the temple are two altars, one of solid gold for sucklings and a large common altar for full-grown animals. At the festival of the God, a thousand talents of frankincense are burned on the great altar. Darius, son of Hystaspes, plotted to take the 12-cubit-high golden figure of a man, but Xerxes, son of Darius, killed the priest who forbade him and took it away. There are also a large number of private offerings in this holy precinct.
184. Throughout its history, many rulers have reigned over the city of Babylon, contributing to the construction of its walls and the embellishment of its temples. I will discuss these rulers in my Assyrian history, two of whom were women. The first, Semiramis, held the throne five generations before the second princess. She built embankments in the plain near Babylon to control the river, which had previously caused flooding in the surrounding area.
185. Queen Nitocris, the wiser of the two queens, left behind her works as a memorial of her reign. She was aware of the great power and restless enterprise of the Medes, who had taken Nineveh and other cities, and expected to be attacked in her turn. To increase the defences of her empire, she made the river Euphrates, which traverses the city, wind three times in sight of the same village, Ardericea. She also made embankments along each side of the Euphrates, and dug a basin for a lake a great way above Babylon, close to the stream. The soil dug out of this basin was used to make the embankments, and stones were used to border the entire margin of the reservoir. Her aim in making these works was to prevent the Medes from holding intercourse with the Babylonians, and so to keep them in ignorance of her affairs.
186. While Nitocris was using the soil from the excavation to defend the city, she also had another project in mind. As I said, the city was divided by the river into two parts, and before her reign, if someone wanted to cross from one side to the other, they had to take a boat, which was very inconvenient. So, while she was digging the lake, Nitocris thought of a way to both remove this inconvenience and leave a monument of her reign over Babylon. She ordered for immense blocks of stone to be hewn and, when they were ready and the basin was excavated, she diverted the entire stream of the Euphrates into the cutting, leaving the natural channel of the river dry. She then lined the banks of the stream within the city with quays of burnt brick and bricked the landing-places opposite the river-gates, using the same brickwork as the town wall. With the materials she had prepared, she built a stone bridge near the middle of the town, the blocks of which were bound together with iron and lead. During the day, square wooden platforms were laid along from pier to pier for people to cross the stream, but at night they were withdrawn to prevent robberies. When the river had filled the cutting and the bridge was finished, the Euphrates was returned to its ancient bed, and the basin was suddenly transformed into a lake, serving the purpose for which it was made and giving the inhabitants the advantage of a bridge.
187. The princess had a remarkable plan: she had her tomb built high above the heads of the passersby in one of the city's main gateways, with an inscription that read, "If any of my successors on the throne of Babylon is in need of treasure, let him open my tomb and take as much as he needs - but only if he is truly in need, for it will not be for his good." The tomb remained untouched until Darius came to the kingdom. He was frustrated that he couldn't use one of the gates of the town and that a sum of money was lying idle, inviting him to take it. But he couldn't use the gate because the dead body would have been over his head. So he opened the tomb, but instead of money, he found only the dead body and a writing that said, "If you weren't so greedy and didn't care how you got it, you wouldn't have disturbed the dead."
188. Cyrus' expedition was against Labynetus' son, who shared his father's name and was king of the Assyrians. When the Great King went to war, he was always supplied with provisions prepared at home and his own cattle. He also took water from the Choaspes River, which flows by Susa, as it was the only water Persian kings drank. Wherever he traveled, he was accompanied by four-wheeled cars pulled by mules, which carried the boiled Choaspes water in silver flagons.
189. On his way to Babylon, Cyrus came to the banks of the Gyndes, a stream that rose in the Matienian mountains and ran through the Dardanians before emptying into the Tigris. The Tigris then flowed on by the city of Opis and emptied into the Erythraean sea. When Cyrus arrived, one of the white horses accompanying him stepped into the water, trying to cross by himself, but the current swept him away and he drowned. Furious, Cyrus threatened to break the river's strength so that even women could cross it without wetting their knees. He divided his army into two parts, marked out 180 trenches on each side of the Gyndes, and set them to dig. Despite the loss of the whole summer season, he accomplished his threat with the help of so many hands.
190. When spring arrived, Cyrus marched against Babylon. The Babylonians, encamped outside their walls, awaited his coming and a battle ensued. Cyrus emerged victorious and the Babylonians retreated within their walls. They were prepared for the siege, having stocked up on provisions for years, knowing that Cyrus would eventually come for them.
191. Cyrus was in a quandary as he made no progress against the city. He then came up with a plan or someone suggested it to him. He placed a portion of his army at the point where the river entered the city and another body at the back of the place where it exited. He ordered them to march into the town through the river bed as soon as the water became shallow enough. He then drew off with the unwarlike portion of his host and went to the place where Nitocris had dug the basin for the river. He did the same as she had done and diverted the Euphrates into the basin which was then a marsh. This caused the river to sink to a level where it was shallow enough to be fordable. The Persians who had been left at Babylon by the river-side entered the stream which was now only up to a man's thigh and got into the city. Had the Babylonians been aware of this, they would have destroyed the Persians as they would have closed all the street-gates that opened onto the river and attacked them from the walls on both sides. But the Persians came upon them by surprise and took the city. The residents in the central parts of the city were still unaware of what had happened as they were in the middle of a festival and continued to dance and revel until they learnt of the capture. This is how Babylon was first taken.
192. I will present many proofs of the power and resources of the Babylonians, but one stands out. The whole Persian-ruled country pays a fixed tribute and is divided into districts that supply food to the Great King and his army throughout the year. Of the twelve months, Babylon provides food for four and the rest of Asia for eight, showing that Assyria is one-third of all of Asia in terms of resources. Of all the Persian governments, or satrapies, this is the best. When Tritantaechmes, son of Artabazus, held it, it brought him an artaba of silver every day. The artaba is a Persian measure that holds three choenixes more than the medimnus of the Athenians. He also had a private stud of eight hundred stallions and sixteen thousand mares, twenty to each stallion. He kept so many Indian hounds that four large villages of the plain were exempt from all other charges in exchange for providing them food.
193. Little rain falls in Assyria, but it's enough to make the corn sprout. After that, the plant is nourished and the ears are formed with irrigation from the river. Unlike in Egypt, the river doesn't overflow the corn-lands on its own, but is spread over them by hand or with the help of machines. All of Babylonia is crisscrossed with canals, the largest of which runs towards the winter sun and is only navigable by boat. It's carried from the Euphrates to the Tigris, the river on which Nineveh once stood. Of all the countries we know, none is as fruitful in grain as Babylonia. It doesn't grow figs, olives, or vines, but its grain yields two-hundred-fold, and sometimes even three-hundred-fold. The wheat and barley blades are often four fingers wide, and the millet and sesame even more. The only oil they use is made from sesame-plants. Palm-trees grow all over the flat country, mostly the kind that bear fruit, which provides them with bread, wine, and honey. They're cultivated like fig-trees, including tying the fruit of male-palms to the branches of date-bearing palms to let the gall-fly enter the dates and ripen them, and to prevent the fruit from falling off. Male-palms, like wild fig-trees, usually have gall-fly in their fruit.
194. Surprising me most in the land after the city of Babylon itself are the boats that come down the river. Circular and made of skins, the frames are cut from willow in the country of the Armenians above Assyria. The frames serve as hulls and are then covered with skins, making the boats round like a shield. They are filled with straw and their cargo is loaded on board before they are allowed to float down the stream. The main cargo is wine stored in casks made of palm-wood. Two men manage the boats, each standing upright and using an oar, one pushing and the other pulling. The boats come in various sizes, the biggest carrying up to five thousand talents' burthen. Each boat has at least one live ass on board. When they reach Babylon, the cargo is unloaded and sold, after which the men break up their boats, sell the straw and frames, and load the skins onto their asses before heading back to Armenia. The current is too strong for the boats to return upstream, so they are made of skins instead of wood. On their return to Armenia, they build new boats for the next voyage.
195. The Babylonians wore a linen tunic that reached their feet, and over it a woolen tunic. They also had a short white cloak and shoes that were similar to those worn by the Boeotians. They had long hair and wore turbans on their heads, and they anointed their bodies with perfumes. Everyone carried a seal and a walking stick that was carved at the top into the shape of an apple, a rose, a lily, an eagle, or something similar; they never used a plain stick.
196. Once a year, the people of the Illyrian tribe of the Eneti, and the Babylonians, would gather in each village to select brides. The men would form a circle around the maidens of marrying age, and a herald would call up each one in turn, starting with the most beautiful. The richest men would bid against each other for the loveliest maidens, while those who were indifferent about beauty would take the more homely damsels with marriage-portions. After the beautiful damsels had been called up, the herald would call up the ugliest, such as a cripple, and ask who would take her with the smallest marriage-portion. The money paid for the beautiful damsels would be used to provide marriage-portions for the uglier ones. No one was allowed to give their daughter in marriage to the man of their choice, and no one could take the damsel they purchased without providing bail to make her their wife. If they did not agree, the money could be returned. This custom has since fallen out of use, and now the poorer people of the common people, who have been maltreated by their lords since the conquest, bring up their daughters to be courtesans to prevent them from being taken away to distant cities.
197. I think their next wisest institution after the one I just praised is this custom: they don't have doctors, but when someone is sick, they lay them in the public square and passers-by come up to them. If they've ever had the same illness or know someone who has, they give advice based on their own experience or what they know. Everyone is expected to stop and ask the sick person what's wrong.
198. When a Babylonian has been intimate with his wife, they sit opposite each other in front of a censer of burning incense. At dawn, they wash before touching any of their shared items, a practice also observed by the Arabians. The Babylonians bury their dead in honey and have funeral lamentations similar to the Egyptians.
199. In Babylon, it is a shameful custom that every woman must go to the precinct of Venus and consort with a stranger at least once in her life. Wealthier women arrive in covered carriages with attendants, while the majority arrive with wreaths of string around their heads. There is always a large crowd, and lines of cord mark out paths for the women and strangers to make their choice. A woman cannot leave until a stranger throws a silver coin into her lap and takes her beyond the holy ground, saying, "May the goddess Mylitta prosper you." The coin cannot be refused, and the woman must go with the first man who throws it. Those who are tall and beautiful are released quickly, but those who are ugly may have to wait for years. A similar custom is found in parts of Cyprus.
200. The Babylonians have a variety of customs, and three tribes among them who only eat fish. The fish are caught, dried in the sun, and then pounded in a mortar and strained through a linen sieve. Some make cakes with the material, while others bake it into a kind of bread.
201. After conquering the Babylonians, Cyrus wanted to add the Massagetae to his empire. The Massagetae were a powerful and warlike people living east of the Araxes River, opposite the Issedonians, and many considered them to be Scythian.
202. The Araxes is said to be larger or smaller than the Ister (Danube) depending on who you ask, and it has islands that are said to be the same size as Lesbos. The people who live there get their food from the ground in the summer, digging up roots, and they store the fruit they gather from the trees to eat in the winter. They also have a tree that produces a strange fruit. When they gather together, they throw some of it on the fire and the smell of the smoke makes them drunk, like Greeks with wine. They throw more on the fire and get more and more drunk, often jumping up and dancing and singing. The Araxes has its source in the Matienians and has forty mouths, all but one ending in bogs and swamps. These bogs and swamps are said to be inhabited by a race of people who eat raw fish and wear seal skins. The other mouth of the river flows into the Caspian Sea.
203. The Caspian Sea is a body of water all its own, not connected to any other. The Greeks called it the Atlantic and the Erythraean, but it is all the same sea. The Caspian is a distinct sea, fifteen days' journey long by rowboat and eight days' journey wide at its widest point. Along its western shore is the Caucasus, the largest and highest mountain range in the world. It is inhabited by many different tribes, most of whom live off the wild fruits of the forest. It is said that certain trees in these forests produce leaves that, when pounded and mixed with water, can be used to dye clothing with images of animals that will never wash out and will last as long as the garment.
204. The Caspian Sea is bounded on the west by the Caucasus range and on the east by a vast plain, most of which is occupied by the Massagetae, against whom Cyrus was determined to make an expedition. He was driven by many strong motives, particularly his birth, which seemed to be something more than human, and his good fortune in all his previous wars, where he had found it impossible for any people to escape his arms.
205. At the time, Tomyris was ruling the Massagetae following the death of her husband, the late king. Cyrus sent ambassadors to her with instructions to court her, pretending he wanted to marry her. Tomyris, however, aware that it was her kingdom, not herself, that he was after, forbade the men to approach. Realizing his deceit was getting him nowhere, Cyrus marched towards the Araxes, openly displaying his hostile intentions. He began building a bridge for his army to cross the river and towers on the boats to be used in the passage.
206. While the Persian leader was busy with his plans, Tomyris sent a messenger to him who said, "King of the Medes, stop this mission. You don't know if it will be beneficial to you. Be content to rule your own kingdom and accept that we rule the countries that are ours. But I know you won't listen to this advice since you don't want peace. So, if you're so eager to fight the Massagetae, stop building the bridge and let's move three days away from the river. Or, if you'd rather fight on your side of the stream, move back an equal distance." Cyrus called the Persian chiefs together and asked for their advice. They all agreed that he should let Tomyris cross the stream and fight on Persian ground.
207. Croesus the Lydian was present at the meeting of the chiefs and he disagreed with the advice given. He stood up and said, "My king, I promised you long ago that I would do my best to protect your house from danger. My own suffering has made me aware of the risks. If you think you and your army are immortal, then my advice is useless. But if you are a man and a ruler of men, remember that life is unpredictable. My opinion is different from your other counsellors. If you let the enemy into your country, you risk losing your kingdom if you lose the battle. If you fight on the other side of the river, you can follow up your victory. It would be shameful for Cyrus the son of Cambyses to retreat and give ground to a woman. My suggestion is that we cross the river, push forward as far as they retreat, and then use a trick to defeat them. I'm told they don't know the luxuries Persians enjoy, so let's prepare a feast in our camp with plenty of food and wine. We can leave our weakest troops behind and retreat towards the river. I'm sure when they see the feast, they'll forget everything else and eat. Then it's up to us to fight bravely."
208. Cyrus changed his mind and decided to follow Croesus' advice, sending a message to Tomyris to retreat. She complied, and Cyrus entrusted Croesus to his son Cambyses, instructing him to treat Croesus with respect if the expedition failed. He then sent them both back to Persia and crossed the river with his army.
209. The first night after his journey, Cyrus had a vision in his sleep. He saw Hystaspes' eldest son, Darius, with wings on his shoulders, one wing covering Asia and the other Europe. Darius was only twenty years old and had stayed in Persia, not being of age to go to war. When Cyrus woke up, he was sure that Darius was plotting against him and his crown. He called Hystaspes aside and said, "I know your son is plotting against me and my crown. Last night I saw a vision of your eldest son with wings on his shoulders, one wing covering Asia and the other Europe. It's certain that he's up to something. Go back to Persia and have your son ready for me when I come back from conquering the Massagetae so I can question him."
210. Cyrus spoke, believing Darius was plotting against him, but he misinterpreted the dream sent by God, which was to forewarn him of his death and the fall of his kingdom to Darius. Hystaspes replied, "Heaven forbid there be a Persian who would plot against you! You found the Persians as slaves and made them free, subject to others and now lords of all. If a vision has announced that my son is plotting against you, I resign him into your hands to do with as you wish." Hystaspes crossed the Araxes and hurried back to Persia to keep an eye on Darius.
211. Cyrus advanced a day's march from the river and, following Croesus' advice, left the weaker part of his army in the camp and took the better troops to the river. Soon after, a third of the Massagetae army, led by Spargapises, son of the queen Tomyris, arrived and attacked the troops Cyrus had left behind. When they resisted, the Massagetae killed them. Seeing the banquet, they sat down and ate and drank until they fell asleep. At that moment, the Persians under Cyrus arrived, slaughtered many and captured even more, including Spargapises himself.
212. When Tomyris heard of her son and army's fate, she sent a herald to Cyrus with a warning: "Don't be proud of this victory, Cyrus. It was the wine that made you so mad and brought out your bold and wicked words. That's how you tricked my son and won, not in a fair fight. Listen to my advice, it's for your own good. Give me back my son and leave this land unharmed, triumphant over a third of the Massagetae. Refuse, and I swear by the sun, the sovereign lord of the Massagetae, that I will make sure you get your fill of blood."
213. Cyrus paid no attention to the words of the message. When Spargapises, the son of the queen, realized the severity of his situation, he begged Cyrus to free him from his shackles. When his request was granted and the chains were removed from his body, he immediately took his own life as soon as his hands were free.
214. Tomyris, seeing that Cyrus was not heeding her advice, gathered all the forces of her kingdom and engaged him in battle. This was one of the fiercest battles between barbarians. The armies first shot arrows at each other, then when their quivers were empty, they clashed with lances and daggers. The fight went on for a long time, neither side willing to give ground. Eventually, the Massagetae emerged victorious. Most of the Persian army was destroyed and Cyrus himself was killed after ruling for twenty-nine years. Tomyris ordered a search for Cyrus' body and when it was found, she filled a skin with human blood and dipped his head in it, saying, "I have conquered you in battle, yet you have ruined me by taking my son with guile. I am making good on my threat and giving you your fill of blood." Out of all the accounts of Cyrus' death, this one appears to be the most credible.
215. The Massagetae resemble the Scythians in their dress and lifestyle. They are adept at fighting on horseback and on foot, using bows and lances, but their favorite weapon is the battle-axe. Their arms are made of either gold or brass, with brass spear-points, arrow-heads, and battle-axes, and gold for head-gear, belts, and girdles. The horses are given brass breastplates, but gold is used for the reins, bit, and cheek-plates. Iron and silver are not used, as they are not found in their country, but they have plenty of brass and gold.
216. The Massagetae have a unique custom: each man has one wife, but all the wives are shared. This is not a Scythian custom, as the Greeks mistakenly believe. When a man grows old, his family gathers to offer him and some cattle in sacrifice. They boil the flesh and feast on it, and those who die this way are considered the luckiest. If someone dies of disease, they bury him and mourn his misfortune of not being sacrificed. They do not grow grain, but live off their herds and the plentiful fish in the Araxes. Milk is their main drink, and they worship the sun, sacrificing horses to the swiftest of gods.
